Empirical Analysis of Accuracy–Privacy Trade-offs in Federated Learning for Mobile Movie Recommendation Systems
Introduction
Recommendation systems are the most important components in the world of technology today, especially Social Media, Netflix, Spotify and wherever there is a need to show users what to interact with and reduce their decision-making efforts. Today’s recommendation systems have overgrown from simple filtering systems to showing and recommending users as to what they want and what they will like to interact with so that they don’t or to the very least search for their preferred content. Some examples of platforms that use recommendation systems are: Netflix, Amazon, Spotify, YouTube and many more. The purpose of the recommendation system has also overgrown from just recommending users personalized content to retaining them on the platform for as long as possible and keep them engaged with the platform so that they use the platform more and more. While platforms like Netflix and Spotify use recommendation systems to retain the user into their platform and keep them engaged keep them busy, social media on the other hand use recommendation systems to show users content for maximum likes comments shares Etc. (Afsar et al., 2023; Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2016; Raza et al., 2026, p. 100849; Z. Xia et al., 2024, pp. 196914–196928) 
There is something called “paradox of choice”, which says that for user to choose from options it is better to give them more options however if we give them more options they get overwhelmed and that lead to less user interest in the platform which is trying to give user more options.  This forms a paradox and it has to be resolved using some algorithm. Every recommendation system out there that is employed or implemented in any kind of Technology is trying to resolve this Paradox of choice. The irony is that while paradox of choice is a paradox, solution is not in solving the paradox. But rather finding a sweet spot between the number of items recommended and the number of items not recommended. (Iyengar & Lepper, 2000, pp. 995–1006; Scheibehenne et al., 2010, pp. 409–425)
The second purpose of recommendation system is to generate revenue for the platform. Because the more user engages with the platform, the more engagement with the sponsors or the advertisements or the affiliates will happen and that will help the platform to generate even more money. So for example,  in platforms like Instagram and Facebook if the user happens to spend time more than previous day then these platforms have a business model of showing ads and sponsored content. So it is more likely that the user will click on some advertisement or some sponsored content which will lead to platform making more money.. We can quote another example of recommendation system in Amazon which is called frequently bought together. This feature recommends related items which user is interested in. so if user buys an item X  and the user is being shown item a b and c.It is likely that user may be interested in at least one of the a b and c and may end up buying any of the recommended items which the user did not intend or did not think of buying previously.  so that results in the sellers making more money and Amazon making more money. (Hostler et al., 2011, pp. 336–343; Jannach & Jugovac, 2019; R. Tang et al., 2025, pp. 282–309)
Let’s talk a little bit about how the recommendation system actually works. The conventional way is that the users data the data which is for example users likes, user comments, users favourite things, users preferred bought items ACC. These data has to be taken to a central server where the server processes this data and recommends the user based upon the data that the user generates. The user generates a lot of data depending upon the time and interaction. Even though from user standpoint it is just a simple like or it is just a simple comment which does not do anything to the user but it is a very useful data to the platform that the user is interacting with. So this all data has to be taken to central server in order to recommend more things and more content and more items to the user. This is how most of the company’s work and most of the platforms work. If we name, if we start to name, let’s say Facebook or Instagram, they all collect data and take them to their central servers, which are far away from the place where user is using it or at least far away from the users own device. Tender central servers or central platforms, they process this data, they process all this users likes and comments and shares etc, and they applied algorithm to the data to generate more recommendations that is then brought back to the users device. The user then sees his recommendations and most likely interacts with the recommendations. So for example in the frequently bought items of Amazon user may buy one of the recommended items and the and the bought item is another data which then goes to Amazon central servers and then it adds to the already users data that is present in the central server and the algorithm adapts to the new data that has come and the cycle goes on. The new data then generates a new recommendation content and the cycle goes on and the recommendation improves centrally. (Chajewska et al., 2013; H.-T. Cheng et al., 2016; Halko et al., 2010; X. He et al., 2017; Kairouz et al., 2021a; Z. Li et al., 2025; Schnabel et al., 2016; S. Zhang et al., 2020)
Now this recommendation system which works centrally has a problem. The problem is that all the user data is open to the company and the there is no privacy in the user data. In a sense, the company knows what user likes, the company knows what user favourites, and the company knows what user is going to click next. Privacy is completely jeopardised. And the user has no control over his content and over his data that is being sent to the central server. Not only does the company know the user history, users like history, user watch history, the data since it is open to the company and is and privacy is jeopardised, The data can be easily misused by the company or anybody in between who might be reading the data. Based upon the user’s history and the user’s recommendation lot of wrong Moves can be made by The company itself as well as anybody in between, Which could dramatically harm the user financially, legally and emotionally. (Barocas, Solon; Selbst, Andrew D, 2016; Dwork, 2006; Fredrikson et al., 2015; Kairouz & McMahan, 2021; Khayari et al., 2006a; McSherry & Mironov, 2009; Narayanan & Shmatikov, 2008; Shokri et al., 2017a)
One solution to this problem is that we can allow user to have a control over what data has to be sent to the central server and what has not to be. But still this has problem user does not know what data is good and what data is bad. Secondly, the user cannot decide for themselves as to what data has to be sent to the central server not because they do not know the good and bad, but they do not have time to select the data and deselect the data that has to be sent and not sent respectively. For example, if a user is busy listening to songs on Spotify, Then the whole entertainment experience can be ruined by just the fact that user is prompted to select and deselect the data that has to be set to this 45 servers in order to make him recommend more songs. This completely works against the company as well as the user. By this, the user will have bad experience, and they will leave the application or the platform, and the company will lose their users, and they will generate less revenue because of all this selection and deselection of the data. It is therefore not recommended to use this kind of recommendation system. For apps which are slow working, for example, the payment apps or something like that, this system can be employed, and it can work well. For example, user can send what transaction in the payment app has to be sent to the central server. And what transaction has not to be sent to the central server. User can decide what type of bills or payments they are interested in, what types of bills and payment they are not interested in, because these apps are not streaming apps. These apps are not working live or in real time. But however, for fast acting platforms, or for platforms that work in real-time like Spotify or YouTube, this system cannot work and it can backfire. (Kairouz et al., 2021b; J. Wang et al., 2021)
Now companies come with a loophole that they include a lengthy terms and condition and disclaimers in their applications and platforms that user has to cheque before signing up. Legally this is binding but nobody reads these lengthy terms and conditions and disclaimers. Show in every sense they work against the user in the matter of selection of data that has to be sent to the central server. Clearly this is completely correct but ethically this is not correct because even companies are aware of the fact that users are not going to read the whole terms and conditions and disclaimers of the platform. So if a user happens to suffer some kind of loss because of this data breach or data leak then companies have this upper hand in the legal aspect that they can blame the user themselves as to because they clicked or they checked the box where it says that I agree to terms and conditions or I agree to the disclaimer. Obviously legally user is on the wrong side but ethically the company is on the wrong side. So the loophole is that legally the user consented to the terms and conditions the user consented to the use of the platform despite not knowing what data will be sent and what data will not be sent to the central server.(Cano et al., 2015a; Kotegawa et al., 2008; Kryssanov et al., 2006; Lencses & Takacs, 2014)
One hack to the central server and the complete database is vulnerable to the hacker. Once that happens imagine the financial fraud imagine the legal fraud that can be done because of this data breach and the vulnerability of the central server. Also it is not just about the ill-intentional use of the data once the central server is hacked. Let us suppose that the central server is not hacked and the company is using the data as they intend, however the way they are using the data may not be favourable to the users and may be ethically wrong when it comes to users point of view. There can also be behavioural manipulation because of the central server data that is collected at one place. For example if the central server knows from reading the data that the user is depressed at a certain period of time in a day the central server can recommend the user things like junk food or maybe items of suicide or items that can be used as suicide etc. So the fact is that they are not just recommending or showing the user content or items they are basically nudging the users behaviour toward a certain consequence which is not right. (Cano et al., 2015b; Charbonneau et al., 2019; Datta et al., 2015a; Goodfellow et al., 2015a; Kairouz et al., 2021c; Narayanan & Shmatikov, 2007a; Shokri et al., 2017b)
“Denial of services”. For example lets say a bank server knows that a certain user deals with low income people and transacts with people of low income and bank balance. It might then conclude that the user is not reliable to be given any loan. So the system will automatically blacklist the user from taking any loan because of their history because of their transaction history not because of their Credit history but because of the transaction history. This denial of services is against the freedom That we are striving to achieve in modern society Because the blacklisting is being done not on the basis of behavioural history but on the basis of statistical guess. Because companies are financially motivated to exploit data this way, they won't stop voluntarily. This highlights the urgent need for laws (like GDPR in Europe) that force companies to handle data ethically and give users ownership ("a firmer grip") over their own information. (Corbett-Davies et al., 2023; Datta et al., 2015b; Hardt et al., 2016; W. Li et al., 2013; Matysiak, 2015; Schwarz et al., 2019)
In this document we present a solution that is called Federated learning. Federated learning is a distributed learning system in which the data instead of going to a central server is trained on the device of the user itself. One primary thing that is solved because of the federated learning is that the data does not leave the device of the users that way user can have their privacy as much as possible. This consequently makes company blind to what the user likes what the user comments and their history their watch history their buying history etc and consequently the companies cannot behaviourally manipulate the user or misuse their data or sell their data to hackers for ill intentions. The whole idea of Federated learning is that the machine learning which happens at the central server is now happening in the device of the user itself. But since we know that the user’s device is not as powerful and strong as the central server are so there has to be some compensation. However, the good thing is that the compensation is not in the privacy, no privacy is jeopardised. The compensation lies in the model training and the model that the central server receives. This whole document talks about the federated learning in a very deep detail. (Kairouz et al., 2021d; McMahan et al., 2023a)
The FedLearning works within the loop between the client devices and the central server where the raw information about the user is stored in the device (browsing history, purchase history, watchlists or personal preferences) and keeps a privacy. The solution to be proposed will combat the above weaknesses of centralization because the data will not be centralized. FL has the model being trained on all devices with local data; hence, eliminating the risk of data leakage, breach, or unauthorized access to the information being transferred and eliminates the need to have a central repository of sensitive information as compared to the old systems of machine learning where the data is collected in the central server to train the model. (Kairouz et al., 2021d; McMahan et al., 2023a)
To help in collective model improvement in case of a large client base, the devices are not transmitting raw data rather sending sparse, anonymized model updates, mathematical descriptions of local training. It is performed in the following manner:
Model Distribution: It is founded on the current global model which is delivered to a chosen client devices by a central server and is generally a point of refinement.
Local Training: Each of the machines are trained on its own data, in a series of epochs that lead to modifications to the parameters. Despite the fact that the computing power of the client machines is also low in comparison with that of the servers, the privacy is ensured, as the techniques like model compression or by not participating in all instances are used.
Secure Update Transmission: Model updates that are encrypted therefore post updates in a secure way and are learned insights without revealing the knowledge on which the insights are founded.
Aggregation and Global Refinement: The server makes use of the aggregation to produce a superior global model (e.g., averaging) that is resistant to malicious or erroneous updates.
Iteration: This is made to repeat until the convergence in order to be able to come up with models that can be utilized in the processes like customized predictions in mobile keyboards or wearable.
This model utilizes the abundance of client information, and is dependent on the providers of the service despite the profile itself and this reduces the chances of manipulation of behaviour, specific advertisement, or commodification of the information. The efficiency of communication and training processes conducted to attack the resource constraints affecting the client devices also do not affect privacy. Finally, FL will allow the equitable development of AI by providing privacy-saving material of distributed devices. (Kairouz et al., 2021e; McMahan et al., 2023b; Q. Yang et al., 2019)
However, there is no free lunch. The Federated Learning System also comes with a compensation. This compensation comes as the accuracy level of the models and the recommendation system as compared to the centralised learning systems. In other words, the centralised recommendation systems because they intake raw data from the devices have greater accuracy as compared to the Federated Learning Systems because the federated learning system do not give out raw data to the centralised server and hence centralised server does not know the use and patterns of each user individually. Hence the Federated learning system only averages the aggregated results of models received from individual devices and not the raw data itself. Had they received the raw data themselves the accuracy would be greater but they do not. But on the other hand, the privacy is maintained. This paper tries to establish a sweet spot between accuracy and privacy of Federated learning system in mobile phones. Since as we discussed that there is no free lunch so obviously there is a trade-off between accuracy and privacy when it comes to Federated learning system. So, we have to find a sweet spot where both accuracy and privacy work the best and work in the most optimal way possible. This does not mean that the accuracy will match the accuracy of a centralised learning system or the privacy level will be the maximum this is impossible. Our goal is to find the optimal point where both accuracy and privacy are at their best when it comes to Federated learning system and we are not concerned with comparing the accuracy and privacy with centralised learning system because obviously centralised learning system have far greater accuracy but far lesser privacy so we are not comparing that here. We’re only trying to find the optimal point where Federated learning will work best in terms of both accuracy and privacy. (Abadi et al., 2016a; Geyer et al., 2018a; Kairouz et al., 2021f; T. Li, Sahu, et al., 2020; McMahan et al., 2023c; Y. Zhao et al., 2018)

There are three approaches suggested for Federated Learning algorithm:
Privacy: Privacy is a mathematical framework which makes sure that the output of the trained model is almost same with the user's data included in the dataset or without it. It is measured by.
Homomorphic Encryption: This technique first transfers the user's data into what is called "ciphertexts" and encrypts it. Then it executes computations to be done on the cipher texts; instead of the raw data. The results of these computations is another ciphertext which when decrypted is very similar to the results if the computations were performed on raw, unencrypted data.
Secure Multi-Party Computation: This method works in such a way that the central server only sees the aggregated result and never the individual data. This is done through adding noise to the individual data point in such a way that when the aggregation occur in the central server, the noises cancel out and an aggregated result is obtained while at the same time, the central server misses out on what the individual data was. (Abadi et al., 2016b; Acar et al., 2017a; Bonawitz et al., 2016; Hill, 2009a; Khayari et al., 2006b; S. Li & Lo, 2007)
Differential Privacy
The whole idea of Federated learning is that the data does not leave the device. However, research has shown that when the models are updated either the global models or the local models when they are updated they leak out very crucial information about the device and the pattern the user is dealing with. The model updates which are also called gradients or weights shared by clients can leak sensitive information about the underlying training data. To deal with this kind of problem privacy is integrated into Federated Learning Pipeline. In a sense, privacy is a mathematical framework which actually limits the amount of data or the amount of gradient that an adversary can infer about any single user’s participation in the training process.
In simple word if enough gradients are observed by the attacker, the attacker can reverse engineer the whole process and reach the initial data which created all these lists of gradients. To explain the vulnerability the relationship between the data and the gradient , points in the direction that minimizes loss for the specific data point . This gradient carries fingerprint of the datapoint . In other words, if there are enough gradient, then all the gradient can be reverse engineer to find the original data point. So this is a serious vulnerability. This technique is called deep leakage. (Abadi et al., 2016c; Geiping et al., 2020a; Geyer et al., 2018b; Goodfellow et al., 2015b; Shokri et al., 2017c; B. Zhao et al., 2020; L. Zhu et al., 2019a)
Differential privacy ensures that the output of a randomised algorithm remains roughly the same, even if one or two users data is absent or corrupted in anyway.
Formally, a randomized mechanism  satisfies- Privacy if for all adjacent datasets  and  (which differ by exactly one user) and for all possible sets of outcomes :

 (Epsilon): The Privacy Budget. It controls the maximum distance between the output distributions. A smaller  implies stronger privacy (the distributions are nearly identical) but potentially lower model utility (accuracy).
 (Delta): The probability that the privacy guarantee fails. This is usually set to be very small (e.g., less than the inverse of the dataset size).

and : They are the outputs of the algorithm in Dataset. (Fioretto et al., 2024, p. 10)

The anonymity of data points (gradient) which can be reverse engineered to arrive back at the original data point is solved by making the data point a probability data point instead of deterministic data point. This kind of adds a layer of mathematical fog so that no single tile in a Mosaic provide enough contrast to identify a specific individual who put the tile there. The tile is basically an analogy, that let’s assume there is a portrait or there is a Mosaic made up of many different tiles and each tile is placed by different individual. Also, assume that each child has a meta data which does not directly name the person who put the tile up there. However, it details the other information about the person like their address, their phone number and the date at which that I was placed up there. An intruder can reverse engineer this information by making sure that particular address, phone number, et cetera Max, their neighbours and that the neighbour was absent in their house on that particular day on which the tile was placed, so this clearly indicate the person was, even though their name was not taken. This is how the gradient cause problem and the attacks and the intruders can benefit out of it. Adding a mathematical fog and a proper fog helps a bit. (Abadi et al., 2016d; Geiping et al., 2020b; Geyer et al., 2018c; Khayari et al., 2006c; Narayanan & Shmatikov, 2007b; L. Zhu et al., 2019b)
Homomorphic Encryption
In standard encryption and decryption, data exists in two forms. First is transit form and the other is rest form. Transit form is also known as Moved data. The REST form is also known as stored data. The purpose of encryption is that it has to effectively store the data in the two states. As long as the data is encrypted, it is faithfully safe. However, when some computation has to be performed, for example some machine learning or some addition, subtraction has to be performed, the data has to be decrypted and exposed to the processor and the operating system. This creates a small window of vulnerability, and this window of vulnerability is known as “Data in use”.
Homomorphic encryption solve this problem by performing calculations and computation on encrypted data instead of exposing the data to the processor and the operating system. The result which is obtained by computing on the encrypted data is also encrypted. However, when decrypted the decrypted data is almost same as the result obtained by performing the same computation on the unencrypted data. So in other words, let’s say we have two cases in which we are performing same competition on two unencrypted data and performing the same using homomorphic encryption. The result obtained from the homomorphic. Encryption computation will be similar to the one which we obtain from the unencrypted data. However, hundred percent accuracy is not achievable. (Acar et al., 2017b; García-Álvarez et al., 2017; Hill, 2009b; McLean, 2019; Murray, 2016)
Small example of mathematical definition of homomorphic encryption is as follows.
Let  be the space of plaintexts (raw data) and  be the space of ciphertexts.
Let  be an encryption function and  be a decryption function.
Let  be an operation in the plaintext space (e.g., addition or multiplication).
Let  be a corresponding operation in the ciphertext space.
The encryption is Homomorphic if:

This equation states that performing the operation  on the ciphertexts and then decrypting is equivalent to performing the operation  on the plaintexts. (Teranishi & Kogiso, 2023, p. 3)
Note that the operations or the competitions that are performed on encrypted data and unencrypted data are different, this is because the data are different when encrypted and hence to achieve a similar result to different computations are needed. Hence, the equation above presents two different operations instead of one.
One example of Homomorphic encryption is what is called RSA.
Secure Multi-Party Computation
Secure multiparty computation is another cryptography or encryption algorithm in which a set of parties, jointly computer function over their inputs while keeping the inputs Private. Secure multiparty computation also resembles homomorphic encryption any sense that it protects the data at its processing. While traditional encryption protect data at transmission and storage, this protects the data during the time of its use, also known as the data-in-use. 
The problem was introduced by a person named Andrew Yao in 1982 as millionaires problem. So the problem is that two millionaires want to know who is richer without reviewing their actual net worth or their assets to each other. This problem can be extended to number of millionaires show in a general sense  parties  with their private inputs (asset details)  wish to compute the function  with following conditions:
All parties learn the correct output of the function  which has been calculated.
No party, learns anything about any other parties, inputs or asset details, except what can be inferred or concluded from and their own inputs. (Balla, 2025, p. 6; Cammarota et al., 2023, p. 2; Martins et al., 2013)


Ideally, there is something called trusted, third-party or TTP. So in an ideal world, this TTP is a trusted party, which computes the function faithfully. All the parties sent their inputs to this TTP to compute the function, the TTP then computes the function without revealing anything to the parties, and then it sends back the output to the parties without reviewing the inputs of any party to any other party. The only input that a party knows their own inputs and nobody else’s, and the other thing that they know is the output that TTP has given to them, that way they come to know who is the richest millionaire among all the parties. (Ah-Fat & Huth, 2018, p. 3; Damle et al., 2019, p. 2; Feigenbaum et al., 2009, p. 5; C. Guo et al., 2020, p. 1; Naor & Nissim, 2001, p. 4)
However, there is no PTP or trusted third-party in the real world because if we burden any party or any institution to encryptor descriptive the messages, there is always a danger that they will misuse the data and manipulate the parties. In the world, we use what Is called protocol which involves exchanges of messages..
Now this protocol is considered secure if let’s say we have an adversary , in the real world, and a simulation  in ideal world such that what the adversary sees in the real execution is exactly same as what he will see in ideal execution. In other words, For every adversary in the real world, there exists a simulator in the ideal world such that the views of the parties in the real execution is computationally indistinguishable from the view in the ideal execution. That means the adversary should not be able to do anything in the real protocol that they could not have done in their ideal world. This is how secure multiparty computation protects the data in the real world. (Bates & Near, 2024, pp. 316–317; Butler et al., 2018, p. 1102; Haagh et al., 2018, pp. 225–226; Skalka & Near, 2025, p. 1246)
Two primitives form the backbone of most MPC protocols: Oblivious Transfer and Secret Sharing.
Irrespective of the above-discussed algorithms and protocols, including the adversarial perturbations, homomorphic encryption, RSA, and secure multiparty computation, the federated recommender systems are still many miles to be completely safe and effective. Such systems that allow mutually training models to be undertaken by the devices that are decentralized, without direct exchange of raw information concerning users are likely to fall victim to sophisticated attacks such as inference attacks. In federated learning, inference attacks make use of the aggregated model changes (gradients) sent by every learning round to decode sensitive user information, e.g. personal preferences or viewing history, which should be regarded as a breach of the privacy principles of the framework itself. (Q. Hu & Song, 2024a; H. Zhu, 2020)
Moreover, the information of the users is not homogenous, and this is a significant threat. In practice user data in any realistic context are usually not expected to be typically independent and identically distributed (non-IID), and the tendency of the distributions of preferences, the distributions of interaction dissipating across a wide spectrum are likely to occur because of the conditions of a circumstance or demographic usage. Such a non-IID character can result in the biased models of the world, a reduced rate and quality of convergence, and such models are local and trained on independently specific data, which should not be aggregated to perform an adequate generalization. (W. Ali et al., 2024; Briouya et al., 2025a; Z. Chen et al., 2024a; Y. Deng et al., 2025; Fowl et al., 2021; Hussien et al., 2023a; Lam et al., 2021; Lebrun et al., 2022; H. Li & Han, 2019; LI et al., 2022; T. Liu et al., 2023; Mehta, 2025; Qi et al., 2020; Rodio, 2025; Shalabi, 2025; Singh et al., 2025; H. Sun et al., 2020; Wan et al., 2022; J. Wang et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2021a; xue et al., 2022; Yi et al., 2021a; H. Zhang, 2026a; S. Zhang, Ren, et al., 2025; Z. Zhang, Liu, et al., 2022)
The best compromise between the two i.e. accuracy of the recommendation and preservation of the privacy is therefore of high importance in the resource constrained resources such as mobile phones where the models keeps on being updated to follow the changing pattern among the users. The privacy which is unreasonably high, utility will be driven to a minimum and more than liberal privacy will result in the exposure of the data.
The problems of trade-offs between accuracy and privacy in the federated learning are referred to in the provided paper using the case of the movie recommender systems in mobile devices. In evaluating the effectiveness of federated movie recommenders using varying privacy settings we do also consider their effectiveness in terms of local training epochs and also client sampling plan and aggregation plan on data. Specifically, we examine implications of such a privacy-related trade-offs as lossless noise multipliers to privacy budget and privacy level indicator (e.g., specifies privacy level 5) does affect such valuable indicators as recommendation precision, recall, NDCG and user experience indicators (e.g., rate of session satisfaction). The ancillary costs we also measure (in terms of CPU or GPU cycles used to perform an encryption or noise addition, network overheads (also called secure aggregations), battery overheads, and latency spurts) are then tested in actual mobile hardware (Android phones). (Ahmadzai & Nguyen, 2024; Z. Chen et al., 2022a; Z. Cheng et al., 2023a; Chourasia et al., 2022; Y. Han, 2024; H. He & He, 2023; Z. Liang & Chen, 2025a; F. Liu et al., 2022; R. Liu et al., 2022a; Z. Liu et al., 2019; Parra‐Arnau et al., 2014; Rao et al., 2021; T & Tan, 2017; TAN, 2024; Tanveer et al., 2025a; Valdez & Ziefle, 2019; XUE, 2025a; Z. Yang et al., 2023a; zeng, 2024a; Zhan et al., 2023; X. Zhang et al., 2022; J. Zhao et al., 2021; Q. Zheng et al., 2021; Y. Zhu, 2025a)
The Trade-off

The main question these graphs answer is: "How much does the model's performance suffer when we add privacy protections?"
The horizontal axis represents the  Privacy (DP) Budget, denoted by the Greek letter epsilon .
Privacy is a mathematical definition of privacy. It works by adding "noise" (randomness) to the data so no single individual can be identified.
 (Epsilon): Think of this as a "clarity" slider. The lesser the value of , the greater the privacy. This means, that the system adds more noise (randomness) to the data so that backpropagation to the original data points is difficult.
Low  (e.g. 1): means High Privacy. The system adds lots of noise to the data to mask individual identities. It is like looking at a photograph through frosted glass. Very hard to decipher and learn from.
High  (e.g. 8): means low privacy. Less noise is added. The photo is now clearer.
 : No privacy noise at all. This represents the standard Federated Learning performance without the specific constraints of  Privacy.
In order to perform our experiments, we have used a comparably well-known database in the context of the recommender systems research: it is also called MovieLens 1M. The fact that it had a solid basis on a justifiable analysis because it had a million movie ratings with thousands of its users. In order to make it realistic we just simply divide the data set into two data sets i.e. training data set and testing data set. This way we would clearly see the performance of federated learning model in different privacy settings - as they do on actual human beings whereby privacy of the person is a primary issue. Splitting the data and attentively We have made sure that we had numerous users in our models so that we can study with a range of user tastes and movies choice. This assisted us in getting into the literarily the mode that privacy trade-offs can possibly cause on the quality of suggestions. 
After we had fiddled with the privacy settings of our federated learning space there were a few interesting trends emerging. An illustration of this is provided by the fact that as we worsened the privacy budget (epsilon) system inverted the privacy defence - or it induced less noise in the data. This contributed towards the model learning in a much more explicit manner since one of the most significant cause of better suggestions will be that the model was later able to concentrate on trends with simplicity. This is however with a spin to it; Less privacy actually means more risk among the users. Pushing this too far will result in the loss of the main benefit of utilization of federated learning (inability to inflict harm to information of the user). The whole plan was then more or less, to make sure that we do not deprive anybody of his or her privacy, in the name of attempting to make a little addition of accuracy. 
In order to put this trade off into a slightly greater perspective we will speak of one of the figures of HR@10 ( Hit rate at 10 ). This is hence the solution to the posed question of the number of times that the system will get the right movie that will be in the list of the top 10 recommendations. Once we go above 0.5 that is mostly held as pretty good, i.e in doing so it implies that there is the useful system that has not lost its privacy. Our results, supported in prior research indicated that even with a very high privacy guarantee (which here was in the form of a privacy) we could target the values of the HR to a level of 0.68 when given on a big data (in this case, on 50,000 users and 5,000 movies) with a big data. That's quite encouraging! It is shown that the federated learning will be able to help in the provision of smart suggestions without revealing the privacy of the participants due to the streamlined privacy settings. 
On the whole, the results can do a lot to ensure that the importance of further expanding the points of intersection between privacy and accuracy is made acceptable. The discussion of the boundaries of privacy protection has taught us much of how federated learning may be implemented in practice even in the situation with the mobile devices that do not need the space to be so extensive. These results are not merely an affixation of the fact that privacy friendly recommendation systems can exist; however, the outcomes also give some useful insights to the users of the recommendation system a hint at the developers that would perhaps seek to find out the optimal balance between utility and privacy. Concisely, our subsequent study of this area indicates that when judiciously selected through suitable privacy options, federated learning will be the right choice of provision of safe and efficient personalised suggestion in everyday scenarios. 
Challenges and Adaptive Mechanism
In a collaborative machine learning innovation, federated systems such as FedSlate develop these recommendations systems to be designed in such a way that more than two parties collaboratively learn a model without the agencies having to share user information (although eventually they might share it indirectly). However, the advantages of such approaches are potentially negative impacts on uneven distribution of benefits among parties involved. More specifically, organisations or sites with fewer users (probably due to limited numbers or reduced analysability) are more likely to see increased accuracy of the recommendation than the ones with stronger sources of feedback. The rationale of this relationship is that privacy-saving techniques and, in particular, privacy introduce noise to user data to the extent of blurring personal identities. With less information entities, it can be used to have a positive mask to fill the gaps of information and more or less equalises the playing field. Conversely, the user feedback is abundant and high quality on participants making them, it may easily become diluted by the same noise and reduces the accuracy of the recommendations thereby causing a lowered user satisfaction. (Marx & Fuegi, 2020; Nasir et al., 2022, 2022)
This is an imperative fact that draws one of the most important issues of federated recommendation system, namely, the trade-off of privacy and utility itself. The reason why privacy is used is to safeguard individual users to ensure that they cannot be distinguished individually even in an aggregate analysis. However, by employing these privacy safeguarding strategies one willingly introduces imbalance in the performance of the federated players. A case in point would be the organizations that are less engaged by users since with diminished noise the entities will be less impacted and similarly, their functioning will compare to bigger entities. It is also probable that all organisations that have exposure to heavy amounts of user feedback are likely to experience a decrease in recommendation accuracy, as the amount of noise introduced to the system to guarantee privacy will deteriorate, and will hide valuable behavioural predictors within the datasets the organisation is provided. (Z. Chen et al., 2022b; Dong et al., 2023; R. Li et al., 2024a; Z. Li et al., 2023a; Upreti et al., 2024; X. Wang et al., 2022a)
Privacy and utility: this is tricky contact which requires application of a multidimensional observation of federated recommendation systems. The privacy mechanisms cannot be simply judged in terms of their efficiency because it is as well crucial to deeply examine them in the area of fairness. It has to target the assurance that privacy protecting practices are favourable to all the categories of user, regardless of the extent of their involvement, and the depth of information they consume no matter how minimal. This is essential in making sure that no cases of over-benefits or wrongful harming of some groups of users or organisations are present. In other words, the challenge lies in ensuring that the privacy assurance is provided, and at the same time, the utility and equity of recommendations are not undermined to the stakeholders of the federated ecosystem. (M. Ali et al., 2025; Arafat, 2025a; Arcolezi et al., 2025a; Baumgartner et al., 2024; Choudhury et al., 2024a; Z. Dai et al., 2021; Feretzakis et al., 2024a; Q. Hu & Song, 2024b; Karami, 2025; Kim et al., 2024a; Y. Li et al., 2025; Y. Lian et al., 2025; Naresh et al., 2025; Oyekan, 2024; H. Peng, 2021; Pentyala et al., 2022a; J. A. Sun et al., 2023a; K. Sun, 2025a; Tanveer et al., 2025b; C. Tran et al., 2022; Yi et al., 2021b; P. Zhang & Kamel Boulos, 2022; S. Zhang & Yin, 2022a; B. Zhao et al., 2021; S. Zhao et al., 2024)
To successfully go through such challenges, adaptive privacy mechanism must be used. Unlike with the application of the static technique where privacy budget is equally applied to everyone participating in the system, the adaptive mechanisms are developed or modelled similarly, in that they are able to dynamically adjust privacy settings in response to real-time system feedback and learned performance deviations. Such processes are constantly monitoring the privacy and utility trade-offs, which are evolving, to enable the system to maximize the privacy settings of individual players or groups. An example of this is that, in case one particular entity turns out to be particularly affected by the noise of privacy, then the adaptive mechanism can be used to ensure that they have a lower appropriate privacy budget so that their accuracy of recommendations are not impaired unintentionally. Conversely, the participants possessing a more abundant data can be calibrated through the mechanism of noise with a lower likelihood of increasing the privacy paranoia that will unreasonably reduce utility. (Arcolezi et al., 2025b; Cao et al., 2019; Farokhi, 2024; Gao et al., 2019; Hafeez et al., 2021; Y. Hu et al., 2023; Jarin & Eshete, 2023; Jayaraman & Evans, 2019; Kserawi et al., 2022; Z. Liang & Chen, 2025b; Z. Lu, 2022; Minto et al., 2021; Nanayakkara et al., 2022; Research et al., 2024a; Rinott et al., 2018; Sengupta et al., 2020; Subramanian, 2022; Taherisadr et al., 2023; Tanveer et al., 2025c; Vinterbo et al., 2012; XUE, 2025b; X. Zhang, Zhang, et al., 2025; Y. Zhang, 2025; Z. Zhao et al., 2024; G. Zhou, 2025)
It is shown through empirical literature that adaptive privacy approaches result in a huge loss in utility and simultaneously, they result in targeted privacy. They are able to be significantly smarter than the traditional privacy settings in the manner in which they allocate privacy resources in those areas where they are most needed, which would ensure a maintenance of a privacy at minimal compromise and trade-off of the accuracy and fairness. However, there are still difficulties that occur despite the developments. Even federated networks like FedSlate will yield disproportionate returns unless privacy budgets are provided to fit local demands and requirements of each of the participants. With this, adaptive privacy budgeting must be built and communicated to activate fair results and to make the system not favour the ones that receive the least of users and penalize the ones that belong to the stronger dataset.(Arafat, 2025b; Are et al., 2025; Badar et al., 2024a; S. Chen & Qi, 2025; Y. Chen et al., 2023; Z. Chen et al., 2024b; Z. Cheng et al., 2023b; Dipika Birari, 2024; Farzana et al., 2024; Ganji et al., 2025; Geng et al., 2024a; Ju et al., 2023a; Kim et al., 2024b; Y. Li, 2025; Z. Liang & Chen, 2025c; P. J. Lu et al., 2023; M.Saraswathi, 2025; K. I. Wang et al., 2022; S. Wang, 2024; Wei et al., 2021b; D. Xia et al., 2025; D. Xu et al., 2020; XUE, 2025c; Yaghini et al., 2023a; B. Zheng et al., 2024)
Recommendation algorithms ought to be reviewed too so as to ensure relevance and applicability of algorithm in real life. It implies that it is tried on various platforms, demographics, data structure, and devices that have varying resources. Such harsh examination is required not only to comprehend the efficacy but also to verify equity and inclusiveness since the two elements directly affect client satisfaction and engagement. One major limitation that the existing federated recommendations styles are trying to resolve is that they are not seeking to determine more intensive semantic and behavioural links among the users during the model update aggregation. This weakness could restrict the overall power to prescribe or some non-conscious patterns of user behaviour may be lost in this step of generalisation.
To address these gaps, there is a need to do it in an intricate manner. Equity enhancement, adoption of dissimilar data formats, and trade-offs between privacy and utility satisfaction, as well as creation of adaptive controls, are all eminent fronts and frontiers of research and development in the future. One of the potential avenues is the development of the user-acceptable federated recommendation systems whereby people are freely allowed to modify their privacy parameters. Such an individualised approach may be applied to rectify preventable inaccuracy in the case of over-protection as well as avoiding leakages of information. Systems can be better risk-specific and expectation-specific in that users make their privacy settings informed to aid in guaranteeing the level of privacy protection.
A research direction that is aimed at improving dynamic privacy systems, which maximize the trade-off which exists between privacy, utility, and fairness should be one of the research directions in the future. It is noteworthy especially in heterogeneous user population and complex data environment where a one-size-fits-all approach is most likely to fail. In addition, in federated learning systems where the interaction information between the users is sparse it is dire to apply data augmentation, as well as skilled spreading of information across richer datasets in federated learning. Such strategies will have the capability of enhancing both strength and effectiveness of models of recommendations which will be capable of operating in a dependable manner even during data paucity. Last but not the least, federated recommendation system development requires the ability to balance between the maintenance of privacy and high utility and equity such that every one of the users experiences safe, efficient and personalised recommendation in their everyday lives online. (Agrawal et al., 2024; Boratto, 2020; H. Chen et al., 2023; W. Chen, 2025; Chu et al., 2021a; Cong et al., 2023; Desai & Verma, 2019; Hosseini et al., 2023a; Ju et al., 2023b; Kim et al., 2024c; Lee & Gargroetzi, 2023; X. Liang et al., 2023; Müllner et al., 2023; Odera, 2023; Padala et al., 2021a; Rodríguez-Gálvez et al., 2021a; Shiranthika et al., 2023a; Siniosoglou et al., 2023; J. A. Sun et al., 2023b; K. Sun, 2025b; J. Wang et al., 2021b; Z. Yang et al., 2023b; R. Zhao et al., 2024a; Y. Zhu, 2025b; Z. Zhu et al., 2022a)
Related Work
The section under consideration evaluates the literature content related to federated learning in reference to recommendation systems with particular focus on privacy-preserving tools and their impact on the model results. It reviews as well a number of strategies of how to solve the challenges of data heterogeneity, communication efficiency and equity in federated recommender systems and how the rating bias is effectively handled by the models. The latest innovations in federated learning as a recommendation system, such as FedRec and FCF, have primarily focused on matrix-factorization-based collaborative filtering, and FedMF also has a homomorphic encryption transmission of the gradients. Regardless of such developments, the majority of the existing literature is inclined to disapprove of the multifacetedness of the challenges of fairness, prejudice, and the threat to the integrity of the systems that play a fundamental role in generating effective and robust recommender systems. Even though some of the literature attempts to enhance effectiveness of federated recommender system by suggesting mechanisms through which convergence can be expedited or lightweight communication based on lightweight communication is offered, a holistic understanding of veracity and faithfulness of federated recommender system with various model of attacks is yet to be accomplished as a research. Moreover, one of the opportunities of higher performance and privacy facilitated by the adoption of foundation models in federated recommendation systems is the fact that the technology is still in its infancy. More specifically, they apply their massive pre-training knowledge in the models to improve the quality of the recommendations and federated learning is used to make the sensitive user interaction data fed to fine-tune the models local. However, to fully incorporate the opportunities suggested by the foundation models in federated recommendation systems, a novel area of research is required to explore the phenomenon of how their pre-training, and capabilities can be used to mitigate the problem of heterogeneity in data and improve the effectiveness of model aggregation. Paradigm shift in this federated environment suggested in the recent literature using large language model will entail simplicity of data integration and complete utilization of large language model to attain better results, but, at the expense of augmented communication due to large parameter sizes. (Béguier et al., 2020; Bo, 2025; H. Chen et al., 2024; D. Guo & Choo, 2025; Hartmann et al., 2025; Hosseinalipour et al., 2020; A. N. Khan et al., 2024; Mohammadi et al., 2022; R. Song et al., 2022; S. Wang et al., 2021; X. Wu et al., 2020; G. Yan, 2025a; D. Yao et al., 2021; Yi et al., 2021c; X. Yu et al., 2024; D. Zhang et al., 2023; J. Zhang, Hu, et al., 2023; A. Zhou et al., 2024; Z. Zhu et al., 2022b)
In this part, the available literature on the topic of federated learning mechanism in recommendation systems is presented and, in particular, the privacy-saving mechanisms and their impact on the performance of the model are discussed. It also dwells into various mechanisms of coping with such problems as heterogeneity of data, efficiency of communication and equity of federated recommender systems and how the models can be utilized to effectively deal with the problem of rating bias. Recent trends in federated learning as a recommendation system which include FedRec and FCF, has largely focused on collaborative filtering and matrix factorization of the matrices FedMF also incorporates a homomorphic encoding aspect to transmit gradients in a secure manner. In spite of such developments, many of the existing studies are inclined to dwell on the primitive aspects of equity, bigotry, and risks to system integrity, which play a vital role in the formulation of effective and trustworthy recommender systems. However, the research of fairness, integrity in the circumstances of various attacks is an active research question in spite of the particularity of other studies aimed at enhancing the efficiency of federated recommender systems by accelerating convergence or by using light-weight communication schemes. In addition to that, the foundation models supported by federated recommendation systems represent a shining light to high-performance and privacy despite the fact that the sphere is still at its initial developmental phases. Precisely, the models, on the one hand, take advantages of their widely computerised pre-training knowledge in order to better the quality of the recommendations in which also federated learning maintains the sensitive user interaction data utilised in a fine-tuning process localised. However, the complete capacity of foundation models to the federated recommendation system is achieved with the perception of how their pre-training capabilities can be applied to address the problem of data heterogeneity and serve to optimize the effectiveness of model aggregation. Whereas the recent literature suggests as an application of large language models, the idea of large language models in such a federated structure suggests rather a change in the thinking of data integration, which is not necessitating a complete utilization of the large language models but suggests that it will be driven by a paradigm shift to the complete utilization of the large parameters in data integration at an increased communication cost. (Z. Chen et al., 2022c; H. Dai et al., 2024; Y. Ding et al., 2024; H. Hu et al., 2021; Q. Hu & Song, 2024c; R. Li et al., 2024b; T. Li, Song, et al., 2020; Z. Li et al., 2023b; Y. Lin et al., 2020; L. Liu et al., 2024; R. Liu et al., 2022b; Z. Liu et al., 2022; Otari et al., 2025; Qiu et al., 2022; Ribero et al., 2020; X. Wang et al., 2022b; Z. Xu et al., 2024; L. Yang et al., 2021; Yi et al., 2021d, 2022; Yuan et al., 2023; zeng, 2024b; H. Zhang et al., 2022; S. Zhang & Yin, 2022b; Y. Zhu, 2025c)
Other issues, raised with this integration, include unfamiliar issues regarding privacy-security trade-offs as well as non-IID data distribution management issues that are situation in federated settings. Furthermore, in spite of the fact that federated learning has privacy-friendly properties, nowadays the federated recommendation systems are scarcer in their abilities, such as the impossibility of working with non-IID data distributions, and reduced the performance of the models under the influence of privacy-saving processes. As a way of managing those problems, the necessity to shift to more developed federated learning models and secure a high rank of dealing with different data characteristics and high-quality recommendations and high privacy policies. Development of frameworks that can ensure the impartiality and fairness of the recommendations, privacy of the users and disclosure of the outcomes is significant in improving the future recommender systems. In particular, the introduction of large language models and foundation models to federated recommendation systems introduces the new paradigm in an attempt to increase the scope of the generalization of such systems, as well as the quality of its recommendations, which are limited by the classical approaches to collaborative filtering. It is through this integration that the foundation models possess vast pre-trained knowledge that allows it to be capable of solving data sources sparsity and cold-start problems and federated learning provides privacy reassuring form of personalized recommendations. (Azezew, 2025; Bakhtiari, 2025a; Bhalla, 2025; Carrasco Ramírez, 2024; J. Chen, 2021; Z. Chen et al., 2025; F. X. Fan et al., 2025; Hou et al., 2023; Jimenez-Gutierrez, 2025; Kansal et al., 2025; Q. Li et al., 2023; S. Lin et al., 2020; Y. Liu et al., 2023a, 2024; Raheem, 2025; Samee et al., 2023a; Shiranthika et al., 2023b; Y. Sun et al., 2025; Y. Tang & Deng, 2024; Usman et al., 2025; Wagh, 2025; X. Wang, 2022; B. Wu et al., 2025; Xiang, 2025; Y. Zhang et al., 2017)
Indicatively, with an example, federated adaptation mechanisms can be employed to permit desire -shift variations amidst a user in an agreeable and privacy conscious means with featherweight customized adjustment on client devices. One significant benefit of the approach is that the communication overhead of exchanging large-sized model parameters is reduced and, therefore, improves resource-limited mobile environments. Moreover, another potential solution to the suggested system enhancement suggests implementing large language models into the federated learning systems because large language models have an opportunity to leverage their large pre-trainings and generalization capabilities to address the issue of data scarcity and increase personalization. This remedy however comes at a cost in that new techniques are necessary to interdiscipline the computational demands of large-scale models with privacy guarantees provided by the federated learning in the situation of resource-limited environments. The decrease of the data sparsity and heterogeneity of the client devices which typically leads to diminished model performance in classical federated systems of recommendation is another issue of the field importance. More research on the ability of such models to be effectively tuned to decentralized data and the fact that their privacy processes do not attract the attention of the quality of recommendations and fairness can also be conducted. The Federation Foundation Models development presupposes these issues with the help of collaborative learning in federated structures toward the improved model performance and data privacy as well as the possibility to develop more personalized and context-sensitive models. It has the possibility of increasing data and has a smaller computational requirement, with the pre-training and data augmentation techniques, and serves as an option to the problem, such as the shortage of data, variability in computation, etc. More so, federated foundation models offer a robust privacy-preserving scheme to collaboratively fine-tune models with varying disparate and decentralized and non-IID data, combining parameter-efficient and personalization models to decrease the communication and computation expenses. (Abdel-Sater & Hamza, 2024; Bakhtiari, 2025b; Bandara, 2025; S. Chen, 2024; Z. Jiang et al., 2022; Jin et al., 2022; X.-Y. Liu et al., 2025; Y. Liu et al., 2025; Mdhaffar et al., 2021; Sangeetha, 2025a; Solat, 2025; G. Sun et al., 2022; Thuau, 2025; Y. Wang, 2025; Z. Wang et al., 2022; H. Wu et al., 2025a, 2025c; Xiao et al., 2023; G. Yan, 2025b; Yashwanth, 2025; C. Zhang et al., 2024; M. Zhang, Ma, et al., 2025; Z. Zhang, Wang, et al., 2022; Z. Zhang, Yang, et al., 2023; J. Zhao, 2023)
Ultimately, the core insight that makes everything click is that Federated Learning is not just a privacy feature; it is a distributed optimization problem under constraints. We are attempting to minimize a global loss function  (representing recommendation error) without direct access to the dataset  over which  is defined. (X. Shen et al., 2020)

Federated Learning in Mobile Environments
This unification whilst seemingly highly promising presents a number of challenges in specific ways and in peculiar details in specifically mobile settings where devices are frequently constrained by low computational ability, battery life, storage capacity as well as on and off network, inconsistent connections. All these constraints necessitate the development and deployment of highly optimised communication protocols that can be run under variable bandwidth conditions and parameter-efficient fine-tuning controls (minimise memory footprint and computational overhead) during trainings and inference on devices, One of the key elements in this respect is the requirements of memory-efficient recommender systems that can be executed on the leveraged mobile devices of high-end smartphones to less advanced handsets. To that end, novel techniques of compressing the models such as quantisation and pruning are required, which are beneficial in terms of minimizing the size and complexity of the recommendation models without compromising with their predictive capability. Other problems that make lightweight neural architecture, adaptive offloading schemes and the use of modular model components with selective model updating are the problem of cold start in which new users or items have little or no history of interactions information to produce high-value recommendations. (Ahmed et al., 2024; Z. Liu et al., 2023; Mavromoustakis et al., 2019)

This is more so when it comes to federated environments in which data is spread and there are privacy concerns involving the sharing of the data of users. Getting over with this implies that they employ complex techniques, like meta-learning and data enhancement. By modifying models with adaptability to new users or items based on prior knowledge learnt during the execution of a myriad of tasks, meta-learning can help new users or items achieve better generalisation on limited data. The other is data augmentation which artificially creates additional data to be used in training or the effect of current data to be augmented to enhance the learning process to counter the sparsity and augment the robustness of the model. A combination of these methods can allow this system to produce valuable recommendations even in data sparse environments. Moreover, testing of federated recommendation systems in the mobile environment should move beyond the conventional metrics of accuracy to include testing of privacy leakage, communication cost and system utility as a whole. This is composed in the formulation of successful methods of measurement to the extent to which privacy preserving methods including privacy and secure aggregation, safeguard the privacy of individual user data to the cost of subtracting the performance of suggestions obtained. In practice, this is typically a very fine balancing act because on one hand, the provision of increased privacy by the means of noise, cryptographic or other tools may compromise the quality or expressiveness of the model and on the other end, greater respect towards the utility might also increase the cost of privacy of the systems - the architectural design of federated learning systems in mobile recommendation systems is therefore a matter of significant concern to balance these trade-offs. The main points are provision of combination of adaptive privacy budgets, dynamic aggregation techniques by considering device heterogeneity and incentives to produce client sustained participation. More importantly, the system must uphold the abilities of the effectiveness personalisation where the desirability of recommendations is not subdivided when the constraints of the occurrence of local computation and privacy regulations are incorporated within consideration. The trade-offs involved and ensuring that this balance is paramount to real-world implementation because this has a direct effect to user trust, engagement and overall adoption of federated learning based mobile recommendation services. in short, even though the combination of federated learning and recommender systems in mobile setting has a lot of a potential in preserving privacy of the user personalisation, it also demands the radical solutions to the problem of resource limitation, cold starting and the interrelation between privacy and utility. To deal with these problems, highly developed model design, optimisation strategies and integrated evaluation structures are necessary in order to make the most out of potential of this beneficial paradigm and to reveal its full potential in practical scenarios. (Abdollahi, 2023; W. Chen et al., 2021; Fares & Sertbaş, 2024; Y. Hu et al., 2020; Hussien et al., 2023b; L. U. Khan et al., 2020; Khanna et al., 2022; Z. Lian et al., 2022; Z. Liang & Chen, 2025d; Mandal, 2020; Matsumoto et al., 2025; Mugunthan et al., 2020; Otoum et al., 2022a; Qi et al., 2023a; Rokade, 2024a; Silva et al., 2022; Y. Tang et al., 2023; Wassan et al., 2025a; C. Wu et al., 2022; Z. Wu & Wang, 2024; Xue et al., 2023; H. Yan et al., 2023a; X. Yang & Xing, 2024a; Y. Yang, 2023; Q. Zhou, 2024a)
This is a twofold purpose of this regularization name as far as fine tuning in the federal process is concerned. The first is that it offers a guard measure to ensure that the revised model parameters do not drift too far to hold back broad based generalised knowledge that has been acquired by the model through the enormous pre-training step on a myriad of datasets. And this is particularly true to the extent that the clients used are highly heterogeneous and small local data, which might be the case in federated learning, and lead to poor performance as well as poor generalisation, as a byproduct of the overfitting of the adapted models to the respective user preferences or other peculiarities of the local domain.
Second, regularization term enhances a successful knowledge transfer through ensuring that the difference between the fine-tuned parameters and the foundation model is controlled. It enables the model to take advantage of abundant semantic representations and inductive biases held in the foundation model and also learn to make recommendations to every user individually. Such a tradeoff is so important in federated recommendation systems, where one can suit very well to the needs of a specific user, without the overall intelligences that the foundation model represents. (Feng et al., 2022; A. Gupta et al., 2019; Q. Huang, 2025; Z. Huang et al., 2025; H. Jiang, 2019; Jonker et al., 2024; Kalluri, 2024; Kucharavy, 2024; H. Li et al., 2019; X. Li et al., 2018, 2020; J. Pan et al., 2022; J. Shen et al., 2019; Soni, 2025; Y. Sun et al., 2022; Tian et al., 2023; A. Wang et al., 2021; L. Wang et al., 2021; A. Wu & Kwon, 2023; H. Wu et al., 2025b; X. Yang et al., 2021, 2023; Zaki et al., 2022; J. Zhang et al., 2022; J. Zhang, Lei, et al., 2025)
Such regularization is often carried out by more practical algorithms based on such norms which are called L2 norm penalties, or other constraint based, algorithms that measure and limit the number of fine-tuning deviations that take place. This is so as to ensure that the customizations carried out during the personalisation are effective and reliable so as to have somehow alleviated the possibility of catastrophic forgetting of the powers of the foundation model. The federated system may thus make the up to the most personalised, yet accuracy preserving and privacy preserving as well, recommendations which is a combination of global and local knowledge, which may be put into the specific use cases which are mobile, resource constrained.
The way out of this is an interesting solution introduced by the highly learned foundation models with high-level semantic knowledge that can be utilized to generate good representations of users and items and thus allows zero-shot and few-shot learning to simplify the process. The capacity is accompanied by the necessity of providing an adequate transfer of knowledge within the framework of a basis model, which are being loaded into the federated learning environment without subjecting it to a heavy consumption of computationally intensive load. The foundation of web adapt on mobile federated learning is also elaborated to incorporate a balancing of the model structure and training algorithms to be executed using hardcore budgets of resources. It will involve the creation of new solutions in order to quantize and prune optimized to execute on-device inference and federated learning approaches that are able to assist the capabilities of different hardware settings and network circumstances. Such a complicated interaction implies that both the architectural aspects of the foundation models and the limitations of communication of federated mobile environments should be shared broadly to achieve the right accuracy privacy trade-offs. Further bonus plans to attract clients and effective deployment strategies are great in the environmentally friendly platform of the federated foundation model on the wireless field. Speaking more specifically, by using the foundation models and the system of federated learning, we will be capable of performing a more personalized approach and an efficient system of recommendations, by dealing with such concerns as the data sparsity and non-IID distributions of data among the consumers. However, with the integration, new complexities are attached including an effective personalization modelling because of the variety of preferences of the separated clients and effective fusion between collective knowledge of previously trained foundation models and personalization of the users. These complexities lead to issues, and these issues are best addressed by a complex resolution, which is normally a trade-off between the computation problems of large models and privacy protecting on-device learning and efficient knowledge transfer relations in a federated scheme. These methods are usually parameter efficient fine-tuning methods, which can be adapted to the specifics of the individual user, without necessarily doing considerable customization to the large ground model itself. It is a paradigm of teacher-student learning that can be effectively deployed to small devices that belong to clients to utilize the amount of knowledge about the domain of the enormous foundation model. It is a method that is often supported with methods such as knowledge distillation applied in the student model in order to realize causally similar performance with reduced computation costs as opposed to a larger teacher model. It also can be potentially useful in a mobile environment when the computing resources present is minimal; in this case one can have a recommendation system that possesses high capability at levels that do not necessarily overload the available capacity of the device. Besides, parameter-efficient fine-tuning approaches, which can be suggested to supplement quantization approaches like AWQ, can also become a potential solution to running and training these large models on federated networks, which can tackle the technicalities related to the on-device execution. The mechanism is additionally effective as it reduces communication overheads in terms of reducing the amount of data that is transmitted between clients and central server which in turn increases the practicability of executing more compilated recommender systems in the background of mobile that has bandwidth limitation. The federated learning models could be enhanced by adding the foundation models to help improve collaborative filtering through exploiting the immense inductive biases and external knowledge exemplified in FMs and that has been acquired by examining many massive datasets to provide guidance to more common adaptable components of the recommendation system. Not only in making good initial recommendation is it addressing the problem of cold-start, but also in addressing the problem of data sparsity and heterogeneity of distributed mobile dataset. (Carreira-Perpiñán, 2017; Y. Cheng, 2024; Z. Deng, 2022; Dhaouadi et al., 2025; Duan & Xu, n.d.; S. Han et al., 2015; Hee et al., 2022; Heryanto et al., 2024; Jing & Wang, 2024; li et al., 2024; Marion et al., 2025; Prasad et al., 2022; M. Sharma et al., 2019; T. Sheng et al., 2018; Y. Song, 2024; Soundararajan, 2025; Y. Sun, 2024; W. Tang et al., 2020; Tatarnikova & Raskopina, 2025; Vasquez et al., 2021; Y. Wang et al., 2022, 2025; Weng et al., 2023; Yarashov, 2025; Z. Zhao et al., 2023)

This way, the federated recommendation systems will be able to increase their learning capacity in the sense that they are able to enjoy a much larger range of domain knowledge and language sense of the underlying background models. Through this common ground, it must be able to maneuver through the obstacles of the heterogeneous Doctoral users cohorts and the quirks of heterogeneous client devices which is typical of the real setting of mobile surroundings. Importantly, the strategy helps to bridge the difference between the general and individual user requirements since such the system might give better or contextually based recommendations which occur during the incidents of limited or extensively disaggregated data of the users in the devices.
Nevertheless, the federated adaptation is only successful in hybrid approach the art of biological continuous updating and amalgamating the already obtained user embeddings. They are commonly constructed when the information that is being used is an inhomogeneous set of users, and when exploited irresponsibly can be known to produce misguided suggestions, or even cause a performance decline because behaviour or interests of a user in various aspects are not matched. To mitigate such risks, new federated systems are based on high parameter-efficient ahead of time tuning, including adapter-based tuning and prompt-based tuning. In this specific instance, these special techniques are designed to only scale the smaller percentage of parameter model (e.g. lightweight adapters, or prompt vectors), and thus cause an enormous decrease in both the costs of communication and computation. It is specifically applicable in privacy-sensitive federated solutions whereby, it minimizes the number of information that is exchanged among client-specific devices and central servers, as well, it also renders the user information more secure on an individual basis. (Carreira-Perpiñán, 2017; Y. Cheng, 2024; Z. Deng, 2022; Dhaouadi et al., 2025; Duan & Xu, n.d.; S. Han et al., 2015; Hee et al., 2022; Heryanto et al., 2024; Jing & Wang, 2024; li et al., 2024; Marion et al., 2025; Prasad et al., 2022; M. Sharma et al., 2019; T. Sheng et al., 2018; Y. Song, 2024; Soundararajan, 2025; Y. Sun, 2024; W. Tang et al., 2020; Tatarnikova & Raskopina, 2025; Vasquez et al., 2021; Y. Wang et al., 2022, 2025; Weng et al., 2023; Yarashov, 2025; Z. Zhao et al., 2023)
As an example we can say about prompt tuning methods, which can be described as communication and effective adaptation-to-new tasks or to new conditions of users through the transmission and update of small prompt vectors rather than all the model parameters. Adapters based methods are rather integrated together with a model architecture and additional (modular) parts, which could be trained on a user or a device. The advantages of the adapters are that they have low memory footprint and can be easily updated hence making it possible to utilize with limited resources on a mobile device. The two strategies do not deny the legacy underlying foundation model any type of flexibility or localised personalisation.
More to the point the use of the massive Foundation Models in federated by recommendation systems is also a means of reconfiguring the traditional issues with the recommendation system like no data, heterogeneousness of data and cold start issue. The models lead to effective cross-task knowledge transfers that can be used to build powerful user representations that are generalisable even without local data or IID (not independently and identically distributed). This provides a greater effectiveness of recommendation and personalization on a large organization of users that had little previous history of interaction, or users that had less computational resources that was to be accessible on their devices.
Better still, we will be in a position to create good user interests and intricate user interaction designs as time goes on using the state-of-the-art slave architectural components such as specialised Transformer layers and group gating networks. It is more valuable, particularly in environments where there exists a federation of which the user behaviour can very easily be extremely multifaceted as well as stipulated. These types of architectural innovations are used in the creation of custom recommendation structures, which can be configured to suit the capabilities of specific client hardware, in order to make sure that a wide range of hardware can be used to provide high-quality recommendations. 
On another attempt to achieve the balance between the foundation models strength and the practicability of mobile federated learning is a trend of development of more and more personalised adapters. They are tiny modules which ought to have the capability of learning and encoding preferences in individual users without putting much strain on the computing and memory. The customisation adapters allow offering finer-grained and adaptive suggestion services to trade-offs between mixed and universal knowledge and consider the presence of user-specific personalisation. Better still, they do so without invading the privacy of the users either as sensitive information about individual aspects of behaviour is not sent anywhere because it is stored in one of the local storage of the user to the device itself and is never transmitted to the servers out there. (Colombo et al., 2023; Kshirod Sarmah, 2025; A. Yang & Liu, 2025; J. Zheng et al., 2024)
Summing it up, all these methodologies may be used within the development of the federated recommendation systems, that will not only be scalable and efficient, but also highly adaptive and Privacy sensitive. Application The federation of the foundation models and parameter-efficient personalisation plans could be utilised to implement meaningful and context-sensitive modifications considering the privacy of each individual user and executed in the multi-dimensional multi-adept mobile setting. It will be a giant leap in making the reality out of what may be termed the vision of the personalised, and secure, scale recommendation services, a reality, and will also meet the technical as well as the ethical demands of the contemporary data-driven applications.
Moreover, with the ability to optimize the resources by tuning the fine details of the resource based devices, several methods like heterogeneous Low-Rank Adaptation will arrive at the optimal solution of operation only by consuming the minimum communication resources without overfitting simultaneously. Besides this, further research on federated prompt tuning and continuous learning in these models can also be an efficient direction, to make them more personal and offer context-sensitivity, by allowing them to spend more computational power on optimizing the models with new information generated privately. More specific attention needs to be paid to the architectural design and privacy mechanisms of the said federated recommender systems since they are the most important elements to influence the say-off between the accuracy of the recommendation model and privacy of user information. This incorporates a subtle understanding of the dissimilarly secretive protocol and secure summation algorithms which can effortlessly blend so as to result in the forecasting capability of elevated foundation models being eroded to an unreasonable scope. Thus a subsequent study should be aimed at optimization of these privacy enhancing technologies such that it can be in a position to ensure high recommendability, as much as can be, and absolute safety of the sensitive information knowledge of the user with the distributed learning paradigm. This optimisation refers to the search of other ways to compress gradient and asynchronous updating protocols that can bring the cost of communication and ability to cover heterogeneity of clients to a bearable threshold, and will be fundamental in the future expansion of federated learning to large user bases and multifaceted foundation architecture. In addition, the adaptive regularization policies and the client-adapted federated learning algorithms also can be examined to enhance the performance further in the model and alleviate client drift in conditions where the data distribution is highly non-IID, which is characteristic to mobile feedback recommendation under realistic settings. (Chuan et al., 2025; Haddadpour et al., 2020; Hai et al., 2022; Harasic et al., 2023; J. Li & Wu, 2024; L. Li et al., 2025a; R. Li et al., 2024c; Luo et al., 2024; X. Sheng et al., 2024; Y. Song et al., 2024; C. Xu, 2024; Y.-R. Yang et al., 2023; H. Zhang, 2026b; Y. Zhang et al., 2013)
The second element of federated learning that would evolve in the future is the creation of more advanced aggregation techniques, which will be grounded on the differences between the value the respective clients provide and the quality of data they propose. Malicious or unreliable parties post updates of clients of applicable weight wilfully to the system with reliable and relevant updates that can be quite useful in strengthening and validating the system. This makes the weight of outliers or bad data have no such strong influence to the global model that will additionally enhance the soundness of a system of general recommendation. Additionally, the research on the inclusion of federated learning to other more potential innovations, specifically, the Internet of Things and edge computing, is prospective, in particular, the work of a mobile movie recommendation system. These systems provide the highest personalisation and user privacy through localised data processing in the edge device and provide low-latency through decentralising computation. This combination of technologies introduces an opportunity to create a scalable and versatile infrastructure that can meet the demanding computational capabilities of federated learning, the efficient utilization of resources, and enhancing the efficiency of a system and the quality of the model. (Abuzied et al., 2023; Domingo‐Ferrer et al., 2021; Feretzakis et al., 2024b; Firdaus et al., 2023; Javed et al., 2022; S. Jiang et al., 2022; Kumar & Srirama, 2021; Lü et al., 2022; Munusamy & Jothi, 2025; Nitin Sakhare, 2024; Otoum et al., 2022b; Pang et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2023b; Research et al., 2024b; Rokade, 2024b; Saidi & Khouri, 2025; Samee et al., 2023b; Sangeetha, 2025b; Vijay, 2025a; W. Wang, 2024a; Wassan et al., 2025b; Wei et al., 2021c; W. Zhang et al., 2020)
Nevertheless, the problem with ensuring that the federated foundation models have brought out the best in the models needed to recommend the mobile movies systems is the necessity to acknowledge intricate architectural, aggregation and privacy issues. Also added will be the promises of the encouragement of efficient decentralised, peer-to-peer communication mechanisms, the adoption of better and safer aggregation algorithms, which will also increase the efficiency of the system, the reduction of the dependency on the centralised servers, and the server side computational burdens. These solutions help to scale up further to make it real time recommendations and fault tolerance in the large scale systems. Irrespective of these changes, it remains evident that there are still some harsh hardware and algorithmic constraints that must be overcome. Trade-off This trade-off is typically accomplished via efficiency constraints, particularly when placed on model complexity-reduction, which certainly might affect the training rate and the overall machine efficiency. Overcoming these challenges, new model architectures tailored to federated environment would be necessary the architectures that incur minimum communication costs and minimum computational requirements on single devices, and which are very predictable. (H. Fan et al., 2023; Ha et al., 2025; S. Han et al., 2024; L. Li et al., 2025b; Y. Liu et al., 2023b; K. Peng et al., 2023; Tong et al., 2025; H.-Y. Tran et al., 2023; W. Yao et al., 2025)
Higher security and fault tolerance: Decentralised federated learning is a peer-to-peer communication framework that can be enhanced with regard to superior security and fault tolerance. Meanwhile, the cross-device federated learning structure will unlock the bottlenecks of calculating and transferring data that, specifically, on the basis of massive foundation models will demand the new mechanisms of resource management and offloading of tasks. These techniques play a very important role in the trade-off between cost of communication, and the cost of computation locally, which turns crucial in the instance of fine-tuning at scale of large models when prediction is required to predict applications such as movie recommender. To address these issues, we need to develop lean and mobile optimised versions of neural networks, which can successfully be implemented on portable devices, and which can attract fewer energy, and less resources. Further reduction of the model footprint and the computing needs could also be accomplished by pruning and adaptive quantisation - federated learning can be made available even on a broader range of mobile devices. It is also hectic that engineers and designers face in the implementation of the foundation models of these such systems especially the real-time performance and scalability in the industrial applications. The computation amounts to and communication efficiency maximisation in federated learning systems, in more detail of complex multi-modal models such as GPT-4o is an excellent problem, and often involves distributed strategies of computation to manage the colossal resource consumption, intrinsic in training and fine-tuning such models over time with massive compute clusters. (Abbaszadi, 2025; Akon et al., 2008; A. Ali, 2025; Bian et al., 2023; Butt et al., 2003; L. Chen, 2025; J. Cheng et al., 2025; Chinnaraju, 2024; Fu & Wang, 2009; Kumar et al., 2020; Z. Li et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2014; Maher & Nasr, 2021; Matsubara, 2020; Panisson et al., 2006; Park, 2025; Shumba et al., 2023; C. Sun et al., 2023; Tao et al., 2019; Tricomi et al., 2024; Urblik et al., 2023; Y. Wang et al., 2020; J. Wu et al., 2014; Yaqoob et al., 2023)
Privacy-Preserving Mechanisms in Recommender Systems
Personalisation, in the event of federated learning, particularly by the recommender systems, must be done in a manner that will not jeopardize privacy of the users. This is not simply encryption procedure of the data, and aims at sophisticated mechanisms. One of the techniques studied nowadays is called an advanced privacy or secure multiparty computation, to make sure that the data of the user remain secure, not only during the training of the models, but also during inference. Homomorphic encryption and zero-knowledge overwhelming, e.g., are schemes of ensuring that there exist efficient structures of maintaining privacy without exposing the utility of aggregated updates in a model. Providing personalised federated learning methods would allow creating strong and understandable user representations and ensuring that privacy remains the priority. It is especially relevant since it views the issues in relation to sparse data and statistical difference between the various individuals on which it is hard to conclusively ascertain about the finesse of the users in the proper sense. Also, since user preferences may shift with time, there is always the necessity of models changing with of a changing data distribution. What cannot be defined as being thus deemed to fall under the category of “personality leakage” and what can be done to be held to proper measures on the categorizing of becoming less important is one of the greatest problems that remain unresolved fully, yet (sec. 4). So, it is extremely important to develop improved objective functions and optimisation of strategies with the stated goal of preserving personality during the federation of foundation models refinement. It is also vital to generate mechanisms of the adequate quantification of such trade-offs between the accuracy of personalisation, and the risk of leakage of personality, especially of multidimensional and intricate representations of a consumer. Another issue that is of the particular importance is that advanced models will extract sensitive user traits like personality off of seemingly innocent user-interactions and that is the ethical issue of the misuse of the data and bias of algorithms. To meet these considerations, it is necessary that there exist mechanisms that allow transparent auditing, personal governance such that inferred user features are treated in an irresponsible manner. Moreover, federated foundation models would have to overcome current distribution jumps to achieve an ongoing execution, as traditional risks might lack the ability to address distribution changes, as it must being able to educate all of the parameters and is delicate to variations in the user information. (Z. Guo et al., 2024; Priyadarsini & Raja, 2024; Rokade, 2024c; C. Shen et al., 2024; W.-H. Shen et al., 2024; W. Wang, 2024b; Wassan et al., 2025c; Woubie et al., 2024; X. Yang & Xing, 2024b; L. Zhang et al., 2024; X. Zhang, Zhou, et al., 2025; Q. Zhou, 2024b)
This infuses the relevance of adapting inventive and privacy-enhancing strategies to implement personalisation in federated learning environments that can be flexible in addressing the issue of a growing user preferences whilst creation of hard rules on privacy. Furthermore, the future area of research should be centred in combination of both advanced debiasing and advanced model optimisation approaches, to trade off a high quality explainability with a high computational efficiency. This also involves construction of explainable solutions to AI in the federated environment to ensure that users can get to know the logic upon which the personalisation is emanating out of – without compromising their privacy. The solution of ethical issues, including loss of privacy data and algorithm prejudice, in the instance of the federated foundation models will require new interpretability techniques.
Application of advanced  privacy methods whereby ability to apply varying amount of noise can be used to optimize on data utility loss.
Assimilating safe multiparty computer with prototype compressions to be effective.
Federation which involves removing a particular data only after the model is trained is used.
More so, the current study of federated unlearning methods also can potentially promise the existence of dynamic elimination of sensitive data of shared models after training and, therefore, provide upper-notch and versatile protection of privacy. These innovations are also needed to make certain that federated learning systems that act as recommendation engines are adaptive to evolving user requirements, not simply, but also engaged in averting rendering sensitive personality characteristics to which exposing sensitive personality characteristics have increasingly been of a growing concern as foundation models have become increasingly prolific. It is a multi-layered and dynamic issue, and interdisciplinary solutions that encompass advances in machine learning, cyber security and responsible AI are necessary to develop certified and compliant systems that are ready to adapt to new regulations. (Abimannan et al., 2023; Alshammari et al., 2024; Aswani, 2025; Bieniek et al., 2025; Dhanawat et al., 2025; Divya, 2025; Garg et al., 2024; Keerthana et al., 2025; Kejriwal, Goel, et al., 2023; Kejriwal, Pujari, et al., 2023; Komalasari, 2024; Leelavathi, 2025; Nassar & Al-Mashagba, 2025; Pandey, 2025; Pasupuleti, 2024; C. Peng et al., 2025; A. Rahman et al., 2024; Raj, 2025a; Rane et al., 2024; Sandhya et al., 2025; Saraswat et al., 2022; Shaik, 2025; Shallom & Ikemefuna, 2025; Zebari & Musalhi, 2025; Zeraik Viduedo et al., 2024)
These complexities can only be overcome by having a combination of technical protections, such as the use of differentiated privacy, homomorphic encryption and effective governance structures and ongoing auditing. Moreover, federated recommendation systems in the fight against new threats include aggregation techniques, which is resilient and post-training adversarial detection.
It is significant that the models are supposed to be resilient to the data poisoning and privacy threats, and ensure that, in case some individuals do obtain to upgrading the client, the final model integrity is not compromised. This multi-layered solution goes to the extent of implementing privacy-conscious aggregation technology that retains an ability to detect anomalies and layer-wise defence privacy mechanism admitting transparent examination of anomalies. The opportunity to make dynamic inferences on the parameters of the model based on the specific features and capabilities of the client devices opens up a variety of opportunities to optimize the efficiency of the learning process and also consider the heterogeneity of the customers.
A specific relevance of this adaptive approach is specifically considering the fact that representatives of the opposite side may capitalize on weaknesses in order to make an esoteric set of attacks, such as membership inference and gradient leaks, and in the process, to provoke the shortcomings of the currently available privacy-enhancing technologies. It is thus essential that in future studies, efforts be made to strictly test federated foundation models concerning the emerging threats, such as evasion methods that have the capability of specifically targeting large language models, to ensure that federated foundation models are secure and resilient in practical applications. (S. Ali et al., 2025; Aljanabi et al., 2024; Alruwaili et al., 2024; Amich & Eshete, 2021; Aparna et al., 2025; Baji et al., 2024; Bondok et al., 2023; Borah, 2025; Briouya et al., 2025b; Calzavara et al., 2020; Chernikova & Oprea, 2022; Cools, 2025; Dziubiński et al., 2016; Giri et al., 2024; A. K. Gupta et al., 2024; Koike et al., 2024; Natarajan, 2025a; Pestana & Sofou, 2024; M. A. Rahman et al., 2021; Sekti, 2025; Srikanth Vutukuru, 2024; Teryak et al., 2023; Umejiaku & Sheng, 2024; X. Zhang et al., 2024; Zizzo et al., 2020)
Accuracy-Privacy Trade-offs in Machine Learning
The most essential problem when developing the effective federated learning system in order to suggest the movies during mobile devices use is to find the right balance between privacy to the users and the model under question. Although federated learning offers the protection of privacy inherent in that the method does not store the raw data in a remote location, this does not mean that the approach is not vulnerable to newer attacks, including model inversion and data poisoning. There is the need as such to incorporate more privacy-saving techniques. However, these solutions have the propensity of introducing their own form of trade-offs such as worsened performance of the models or increased computer hardware requirements and thereby compounding the trade-offs of the accuracy and privacy even more. An example is differentiational privacy, which provides quantifiable privacy guarantees but with converse benefits of accuracy particularly in low-data and complex models. On the same note, the privacy offered with such technologies as secure multiparty computation and homomorphic encryption is excellent and yet they are computationally intensive to an extent of not being applicable to real-time mobile recommendation systems. (Natarajan, 2025b; H. Zhang, Xie, et al., 2025; S. Zhang, Gong, et al., 2025)
One major field where the challenge is enormous is the clinical AI. In the clinical AI, It is highly Essential to hide the data And secure the data by adding noise An insured that privacy is intact as as high as possible. However, because of the trade off When too much noise is added to hide the data, the inaccuracy in the recommendations increases rapidly. Sometimes the inaccuracy goes over the roof, so much so that the recommendations become useless. Now, second problem is that if the clinical data and the recommendations of the clinical data are to be displayed on mobile system, because the mobile system are computationally weaker than any other system for example Laptop or desktop, decoding of the hidden data becomes even difficult. Devices like mobile phones prove almost useless in decoding the hidden data for the clinical AI Due to their computationally weak nature. It has to be thought about the fact that any privacy mechanism we employ, especially on mobile recommendation systems along with other platforms like your hosting server etc. has to be created dynamic in nature. Which means that if a recommendation system is being recommended on mobile phone, it is different from the one that is being recommended on a hosting website. This is because the nature of threats and attacks keep changing from time to time. Similar is the case with data distribution. For example, in the field of medical science, new diseases keep coming in. New devices are launched that may have completely different hardware and computational power, so that the privacy mechanism that worked on previous versions of the device may prove null and void in its purpose when employed in this newly launched device. This situation may put us into a situation where we are fighting with old disease with old technologies and privacy mechanism, while the new more powerful disease comes up and does damage even more rapidly than any disease we previously encountered with our older privacy protection mechanisms. Then again, the problem that comes is to find a balance between protecting the data using privacy mechanism and the accuracy which the recommendation system as a consequence shows to the users in their device. The problem gets bigger and severe in more complex machine learning models like speech recognition and medical image analysis, where this balance between privacy and accuracy, if biased towards privacy, will result in even severely inaccurate recommended contents. For example, in speech recognition, if we add more noise to train the system with strong  privacy, this extra noise when sent out to work in real environment where user will speak words and sentences for the machine to listen to and interpret will result in wrong words being interpreted by the system. This will make the system useless for daily communication and usage. Similarly, if we apply a similar noisy machine learning model (i.e. A model trend on too much noisy data for  privacy protection), The final result when employee to real life medical applications may cause the model to miss critical features in X ray or CT scan or completely false positive reports. And even worse is that missing out on features in the images which point towards underlying disease may result in false negatives and the patient may be advised to not take any serious action. (Ahluwalia, 2021; Almsallat, 2025; Batista, 2025; Graham & Hamilton, 2025; B. T. Hasan, 2025; N. Hasan et al., 2022; Kalejaiye et al., 2025; Z. Khan, 2025; Kvochko et al., 2024; T. Li, 2019; M. Liang, 2025; Mahmood et al., 2025; Osamika et al., 2024; Patel, 2025; Paulson & Elvis, 2025; Pittala, 2024; Raj, 2025b; Reddy, 2025; Shahsavari et al., 2025; Shakeer & Babu, 2025; Siva & Anbarasi, 2025; Thanikasalam, 2026; X. Zhou, 2025; Кушнарьов, 2025)
Apart from the noise accuracy trade-off in privacy, there is one more problem known as “poor gets poorer”. This means that if privacy mechanisms are not designed with proper balance and buyers and equity, the model may end up discriminating between different user groups or users data. In other words, the noise which is added to the data may be proportional to the magnitude of the data point. So if this kind of noise is propagated into the model the data set may start collecting into groups of small sub data (as in unsupervised learning) and the whole data set may end up looking like a collection of lumps of data at many different places on the graph. Here lies another problem. User who contribute rare type of data, for example some users may like very rare genre of movies. If we apply equitable noise to the data set of all the users these rare contributions may for sure will get clocked in too much of noise and the system may not learn much about these rare data set types and hence perform poorly. Because the whole point of Federated learning is to hide the raw data of the user, it is therefore almost impossible to tell whether the system is recommending content in all fairness to all users or not. Privacy and fairness cannot go hand in hand at some instances. The simple fact that if privacy mechanisms and measures are not designed with fairness in mind, they can lead to harming minority group of users. Especially though group of users who contribute rare genre of data set. To resolve this dilemma, we can deploy what is called “personalised privacy”. In this what happens is that the privacy protection is tailored to each user according to the data the user generates. This helps in keeping sensitive information of each user safe while at the same time system works efficiently and reliably from for each user. A new strategy is proposed known as “multi objective optimization” to handle fairness and privacy tag of work and create a balance between all the groups so that no group of users is left behind with useless recommendations on their devices. This strategy has a goal to find an optimal point among accuracy, privacy and fairness, all at the same time. There are also some technical challenges like a privacy technique named Poisson subsampling which can put too much load on the low end mobile phones or hardware and their CPU. This will exclude users who possess older phones and hence will collect correct data from only users that have high end specifications mobile phones and devices especially when they are new. Consequently the unfairness. This leads us to a warning named Matthew effect warning. It says that privacy if focused on while creating a privacy system without bringing into the game fairness, then the resulting model of Federated learning will reinforce or amplify already existing inequalities making the “poor even poorer”. (Badar et al., 2024b; Binns, 2017; Choudhury et al., 2024b; Chu et al., 2021b; Culnan, 2000; J. Ding et al., 2020; Du et al., 2020; Geng et al., 2024b; Hosseini et al., 2023b; Ju et al., 2023c; M. J. Khan et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2024d; Maheshwari et al., 2022; Padala et al., 2021b; C. Pan et al., 2024; Pentyala et al., 2022b; Rodríguez-Gálvez et al., 2021b; Salem et al., 2022; K. Sun, 2025c; Vijay, 2025b; J. Xu et al., 2021; Yaghini et al., 2023b; H. Yan et al., 2023b; P. Zhang & Liu, 2025; R. Zhao et al., 2024b)
Methodology
In this part, we will discuss about how we did the experiment and the methodology we used to perform the experiment to find the optimal point of trade-off between Accuracy and privacy in mobile recommendation system of movies. We will discuss about the approaches, methods tools that we utilised and procedures to investigate and research about or core research questions. The methodology that we are employing addresses and inquires accuracy-privacy-fairness, its trade-offs which is found and is quite prevalent in federated systems employed in mobile devices for recommendation of movies to the users. What we are most interested is to enquire the selection and processing of datasets to simulate various mobile environments in different types of devices. The devices are especially geared up to simulate resource-constrained real and physical devices; including the configuration of FL protocols which account for non-IID data distributions. Then we also discuss and employ privacy preservation mechanisms such as  privacy and secure aggregation to compute the metrics.
Data Preparation and Partitioning
In this part, we explain how we selected the dataset, what the dataset actually contains, and also what kind of preprocessing and data partitioning strategies we used so that we can simulate a real federated learning (FL) setting for a mobile movie recommendation system. For this work we mainly use the MovieLens-1M dataset, which contains around 1,000,209 explicit ratings, and we use it because it helps us to realistically simulate personalization and user heterogeneity. This dataset is also very commonly used in FL recommender system research because it is quite sparse (around ~95%), it has diverse user behaviour patterns, and it is closely related to the mobile streaming domain, where ratings can be treated similar to watch-history, likes, or content requests. For the preprocessing step, what we do first is we filter the data a bit. Basically, we remove users and movies that have less than 5 interactions, because this way we can reduce the sparsity of the dataset and also handle the cold-start issue to some extent, while still keeping the interactions that are actually meaningful for our experiment. After that, we convert the explicit 1–5 ratings into implicit feedback by doing binarization, where any rating that is ≥ 4 is treated as a positive interaction as 1 and the rest is treated as 0. We do this mainly because in real mobile app cases we usually don’t have full rating values all the time, but more like simple signals such as “watched”, “liked”, or “clicked”, and the missing ratings are treated like unobserved interactions. We also use the timestamp information to do a chronological train-test split (80/20), since it is more realistic for sequential recommendation where the model learns from past behaviour and then predicts future behaviour. On top of this, we apply per-user normalization to standardize the ratings, so that differences caused by users rating in different ways (like some users always rate high and some rate low) is reduced. To simulate federated learning (FL) in a realistic way across different types of mobile clients, we split the data horizontally (so, user-based partitioning). What we do is randomly assign users to K = 100 clients, and then each client only keeps the interactions that belong to the users assigned to it. This setup naturally creates a non-IID data distribution, because users behave differently (different preferences, different activity levels, and also different amounts of data, which often follows a power-law type pattern). We also make sure the client dataset sizes are not all the same (for example, roughly around 10–200 users per client) so that it better reflects the heterogeneity we usually see in real mobile settings, and even after processing there is still around ~45–80% sparsity left. With this overall setup, we can preserve privacy (since the raw user data never leaves the client), keep things scalable for edge/mobile devices, and more properly evaluate the accuracy–privacy trade-off under realistic non-IID federated learning conditions.
Model Architectures
Describes the models of machine learning implemented (matrix factorization) and their mathematical formulation and implementation decisions in order to make them amenable to mobile deployment. This entails adaptations to exceed the resource constrained environments by means of quantization and model pruning by taking into consideration efficient inference in a variety of mobile hardware. Furthermore, in this section, we'll talk on how these models can be particularly designed for recommender systems, like collaborative filtering and the matrix factorization approaches to guarantee high relevant and high performance to the recommender system in the federated learning paradigm. This also includes combination of novel architectures dedicated for the federated scenarios such as federated collaborative filtering or federated matrix factorizational decentralized training and privacy preservation. The mathematical formulations of such models will be presented which hereby underline the role that crucial models play in enabling privacy-preserving mechanisms, e.g. secure aggregation or  privacy that do not come at cost for model utility. The choices and the adaptation of such models are important for ensuring that the proposed federated learning framework is computationally feasible on mobile devices, and can capture complex user-item interactions for purposes of accurately recommending movies. These architectural decisions are done carefully under consideration of strength against dictionaries that isn't meet IID data distribution assumption and ability to maintain their performance under different communication constraint which is natural to mobile FL environments. In addition, the methodologies include the accommodation on the client side whereby individual devices can optimize global models using their own local data and this can be made to allow the personalization to better accuracy and privacy boundaries. The rationale of the multi-global model strategy that is embedded in a hierarchical framework to work with heterogeneous in device and data distributions will also be discussed, and will improve the scalability and personalization from end to end across the network. This approach makes personalized and efficient learning for diversity devices and data distributions possible where the approach means time departing from traditional FL paradigms also by the realization of multi-global model approach in hierarchical framework. This multi-global model strategy is in contrast to conventional federated learning strategies that usually maintain a single global model, in which instead of depending on different client characteristics and preferences, they have more nuanced approach to take care of the diversity of the data. This enables a more adaptive and resilient system which is useful in context where there is huge heterogeneity between users, and between different device capabilities.
Federated Learning Setup and Training
Describes the federated learning protocol (FedAvg) and the communication mechanism and training procedures and the way the clients are involved in the distributed training procedure. This section will describe the FedAvg algorithm as base algorithm and dedicated algorithms to deal with the non-IID data using multi-global algorithms in a 3-tier federated learning architecture. This hierarchical framework has attained better data privacy, computation efficiency and scalability, compared with the traditional client-server FL models. In particular, there are three layered architecture to include clients, edge layer and federated edge layer, which make efficient aggregation and personalized management of models. This architecture allows for a solid and robust approach to handle the non-IID data characteristics by aggregation across multiple layer and supports for multiple global models leading to a significant increase in the efficacy of the model and addressing the data & computation heterogeneity. As the significant coordinator the edge layer explores the metadata of the results obtained from training sessions of clients to give information on model states and requirements as well as to query the federated edge layer in case a suitable model can not be found locally. This multi-tiered approach is more granular in terms of aggregation and distribution of models and more adaptive to the fluid and varied nature of distribution of movie recommendations to the mobile medium. The fedge layer in turn is in charge of the storing and assuring of currency and representativness of these different global models with respect to various data landscape. This kind of structural orchestration allows well selected model and distribution strategy which is especially beneficial for case scenarios using different mobile clients with different data distributions and different computational capacities in movie recommendation system. This holistic solution provides for both the global awareness and individual preferences to be well represented and user privacy and efficiency to be kept. The information exchange between the clients and the server is based on well-known algorithms (e.g. FedAvg) however, the possibility to add custom aggregation strategies to adapt to a specific research need. The server is then used to aggregate these local updates so that it can be used to refine the global model and disseminate the improved version back to clients in order to conduct further training rounds until convergence takes place. This is an iterative process which is the main component of federated learning and thus only allow federated learning to train powerful models in a non-centralised manner, hence improving privacy. This distributed method of working helps ensure that security-sensitive data is not stored on the company servers but on individual devices and is aware of the strict data protection laws and user expectations of user privacy.
Differential Privacy Implementation
Describes the implementation of the addition of privacy using DP-SGD (step by step), i.e.: Gradient clipping, Noise addition and accounting for privacy budget using Renyi  Privacy Implementation In addition, the combination of other techniques including gradient sparsification and  coding will be considered for the sparse communication updates of the local models, such that only significant updates which are in the parameter space will be efficiently transmitted. This layering of defense mechanism provides a significant improvement of privacy on higher guarantees than basic DP, in terms of resiliency in the system against various kinds of inferrence attacks, and how efficient the resources being optimized. These in turn are important strategies to help balance the rigid requirements of protecting people's privacy and achieving acceptable model performance, in the case of resource constrained mobile environments. In addition, the proposed approach integrates the local  privacy mechanisms into the training pipeline directly in order to further improve the privacy protection. This is done by adding precisely calibrated noise on the client updates before transmitting them to the server, thus both individual contributions will be indistinguishable but not stop them from contributing to the learning of the model. This mechanism, mostly implemented by DP-SGD involving the use of per sample gradient clipping to restrain the sensitivity of single updates and then addition of calibrated gaussian noise from distribution scaled to the privacy budget (kept track of using renyi  privacy for the tight composition bounds) assures that the aggregated global model encapsulates these overarching patterns in the federation without, during the aggregation phase at the central server, memorizing and over fitting any private data of any given user. Gradient clipping clipping the L2-norm of the gradient of each sample that prevents any one client's update transitivity and unnecessarily impacting on the global model, and the noise injection makes the individual contributions statistically indistinguishable from each other or random perturbations and so formally guarantees of , - privacy bound the privacy leakage, no matter what the adversary's access to the model's outputs or model intermediates. This is not only useful for warding off sophisticated threats of inference such as membership inference or reconstruction attacks (where the adversaries may be able to infer user-specific preferences over movies from the gradient patterns), but it also is empirically useful for improving model generalisation, acting as a form of regularisation, as we will see when we touch on the bigger question of large-scale federated training scenarios where DP-FedAvg leads to production-ready models (immune to unintended memorisation of rare or sensitive user-item interactions).
Privacy Attack Models
Articulates the adversarial evaluative methods for testing for effectiveness of privacy protection mechanisms. This comprises simulating prominent attacks such membership inference attacks, attribute inference attacks, data reconstruction attacks, model poisoning attacks as observed specific for federated recommender systems in case of movie recommendations with non-IID data distributions. Membership inference attacks, for example, permit a server that is honest, but curious about, the fact that the behavior in this case of the server model and/or corresponding gradients are different according to the synthetic data that were used to train the models in shadow settings of happy but curious data providers and to infer some specific interactions between users and items. Attribute inference Attacks piggyback on uploaded model parameters and thereby infer sensitive user demographics or preferences, and even in a privacy-equipped federated setup find vulnerabilities. Reconstruction attacks by the server Reconstructing private ratings or interactions from the gradients. >80% accuracy in matrix factorization cases on data such as MovieLens. Reconstruction attacks from the server point to the risks of hierarchical FL architectures. Poisoning attacks, which is design as model poisoning or gradient poisoning attacks is a series of attacks where an adversary will make use of a small number of malicious clients in order to simulate the behavior of a synthetic of fake users to upload carefully crafted gradients in an abuse of the federated aggregation rounds. These adverse updates give the global model parameter updates, especially item embeddings, so as to artificially increase the visibility and ranking of some target movies in top-  recommendations, without any prior knowledge about benign clients' data distributions or interactions. For example to increase their attacks, attacker approximate benign user embeddings by using random sampling or hard mining techniques, and create a poisoned gradients to push the representation of target item in the embedding space is like popular movie by inherent popularities in recommender systems. Such attacks are particularly powerful in non-IID situations similar to movie recommendation datasets like MovieLens where it only take 1-5% of all clients to be malicious, and are able to increase hit rate and exposure of unpopular target movies by significant 20-50%, across users, with no negative effect on the overall model accuracy, and without any negative effect on the overall accuracy. These evaluations are helpful to quantify leakage of privacy and integrity using standardized measurement criteria, e.g. attack success rate (e.g. target item promotion rate (in top-k lists)), F1-scores in terms of discriminability of malicious influences, re-construction fidelity (in terms of recoverable private interactions), model utility degradation (e.g. NDCG drop). Empirical results confirm the resiliency a number of proposed defenses like DP-SGD which adds crafted perturbations by adding calibrated Gaussian noise so that are indistinguishable from normal updates, gradient sparsification which sends only parameter changes with significant magnitude to the dilution malicious parameter changes impacts, and multi-global model strategies of which diversifies the aggregation over heterogeous client clusters that reduces the efficacy of such attacks with 30-70% limited accuracy reduction. Such comprehensive evaluations are important in order to discover more about the boundaries of the security of federated recommender systems in practice, and especially, in real world scenarios, in a mobile environment where user bases are diverse and potentially adversarial.
Resource Profiling and Metrics
Includes specifics of measuring important computational resources of crucial interest to practical implementation of federated recommender systems on resource constrained mobile devices, e.g., CPU usage, memory usage, energy consumption, communication overhead and inference time. These metrics are profiled by using special tools like I-Prof for predicting computation time and energy impact of local training tasks on android devices, Trepn and Snapdragon Profiler for monitoring power consumption of computation at a whole system level, benchmarks like FedScale which uses real world device traces for computation speed (FLOPs/s), communication throughput (MB/s) and client availability patterns. In federated movie recommendation scenarios, with large item catalogs (for example using MovieLens, containing e.g. thousands of movies), the limited memory consumption is one of the main bottlenecks.128 dimensional item embedding has a huge memory footprint (10.2 KB), which makes it not feasible to fully store millions of items (>1GB) in typical smart phones with 4-8 GB total RAM, mainly requiring solutions such as elastic item embeddings or server-side storing of items, to limit the memory consumption of each client to 25-512MB. Computation is measured in terms of FLOPs or time per local epoch. 1-5 seconds per round on normal CPUs(more precisely 4x vCPU) are acceptable so that user can not see the too much waiting times. Energy profiling aim at <0.1% FL participation on a daily basis, for which a combination of limited continuous FL participation to <0.1% of cases (e.g. energy consumption) with adequate privacy guarantees (e.g. DP-SGD - Gaussian noise computation overhead) and regularization benefit are provided by e.g., FLeet (0.036% per day). These communication metrics are aimed at tracking gradient size uploads (e.g. 1-10MB/round in the case of embedding-heavy models) against mobile data budgets (< 100MB/hour) in favour of compression (e.g. sparsification). Latency, for on-device inference, have to be less than 200ms (top-K recommendations) for IoT-like devices (64MB RAM); and less than 50-200ms for cellphones (512MB RAM) so that the systems can be used in real-time. in a non-IID, These are thresholds to make 'acceptable' deployment: e.g. peak memory <20% device total < energy < 1mJ update round time <10s Who validated empirically to remain model to useful without too much churn Comprehensive profiling on heterogeneous fleets to measure trade offs e.g. participant selection, model pruning, for production-scale federated movie recommenders.
In order to assess the quality of recommendations provided by our federated learning system, we use a set of standard evaluation metrics that are commonly used in recommender systems research, and that correspond to various aspects of model quality such as ranking quality, retrieval effectiveness, prediction quality and user coverage. Key ranking metrics include Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG@10) which provides a higher weight to the relevant items found closer to the top of the list (which is the reward) through position-based discounting, Hit@10 or Hit Rate@10 which measures the proportion of users for whom at least one relevant item is present in the top-10 recommendations, Precision@10 which measures the ratio of top-10 items that are relevant, Recall@10 which measures the ratio of all relevant items retrieved in the top-10 recommendations (Jadon & Patil, 20
These metrics are computed on a held out test set (20% of the dataset) separated temporally from the training data by chronological splits (e.g. 80% oldest interactions for the train dataset), as is common in recommender systems testing. This approach is emulating real-world deployment in the sense that future interactions cannot leak into the prediction as well as allowing to robustly assess generalization to unseen user-item interactions which is important for federated problems with stochasticity as well as heterogeneity
Together with the next section which is Experimental Setup, the above components of the Federated Movie Recommendation System, including System Architecture for Federated Movie Recommendation, Dataset Description and Preprocessing, Federated Learning Model Design, Privacy Mechanisms Implemented and Evaluation Metrics and Resource Profiling and Metrics would in large part ensure an extensive and holistic methodology for the fostering of privacy preserving Federated recommender systems.
The System Architecture illustrates a layered client-server architecture around the notion of movie recommendations, both for the decentralized process training, which is based on the user devices, and for global models aggregated at the server able to work with large size item catalogue as MovieLens avoiding memory constraint by dedicated strategies as using elastic embeddings or also with large items at the server . Dataset Description and Preprocessing Describes the treatment of the real world and large benchmarks, such as MovieLens, e.g. sparsity, cold start problems, non-IID distributions common in user interaction data, normalization, splitting strategies, synthetic data augmentation in order to simulate heterogeneous client behaviours . The Federated Learning Model Design, in which the embedding based architectures can be embedded with local personalization, such as matrix factorization, or graph neural networks, adapted to on physical computation is stated, to overcome statistic heterogeneity -in which HL user show skewed preferences and interaction frequencies.
Privacy Mechanisms Implemented Provide integrated defenses as, e. g.  privacy through stochastic gradient descent, and gaussian noise injection of gradient sparsification reduce transmitted sensitive update and multi-global model aggregation across client clusters such as effectively defend the attribute inference attack of inferring demographics from model parameters, the reconstruction attack of recovering private ratings with over 80% accuracy, the poisoning attack of adversarial clients craft the gradient to boost target items by 20-50% in topk lists . Evaluation Metrics including the standardized components such as the hit rate , F1 tens for attack detection, the reconstruction fidelity, the model utility degradation, as well as accuracy as price privacy trade off measured with the privacy budgets ( epsilon ) and the utility drops of a model in an adversarial environment . Finally, Resource Profiling and Metrics does benchmarking of critical constraints on mobiles with programs and tools including I-Prof, Trepn, and FedScale traces addressing deadlines of critical resource constrictions including peak memory of 20% device RAM requirement (128 par 264 megabytes), energy less than 1mJ per update and 0.1% per day, communication in form of sparsified gradients, and inference latency less than 200 ms, viability in heterogeneous fleets, participant selection, and pruning tasks.
This frameworks include, in addition to the theoretical background. (e.g. FL convergence under non-IID data ), architectural designs. (e.g. horizontal vs. vertical FedRec paradigms ), practical optimisations. (e.g. adaptive aggregation for stragglers ) customised for privacy provisioning, resource limited FedRecs, comes with a direct answer to many of the challenges such as the amplifying impacts of non-IID data distributions on personalization disparities, the heterogeneity of adversarial attack scenarios (from poisoning through fake user or gradients attacks), as well as mobile deployment constraints. (e.g. system heterogeneity and high communication costs) 
The Experimental Setup section implement this methodology in terms of details in simulation environment (e.g. FedDemo or Flower for multi-device emulation), hyperparameter setting (e.g. local epochs, learning rates optimized for non-IID), baseline models for benchmarking (e.g. FedAvg, FedProx, centralized MF) and strict evaluation protocols (e.g. cross validation for IID/non-IID splits, multiple seeds for stability) clearing the path for empirical validation in various ways e.g. different attack levels, privacy budgets and device profiles . Through this operationalization rigid assessments of the trade-offs between the utility of the models and the difficulty of actual mobile deployments is possible with various federated recommendation strategies.
Experimental Setup
4.1 Overview
This chapter is an account of the whole experiment design with which we estimated the trade-offs between accuracy and privacy in federated learning particularly in their application to movie recommendation systems that are supposed to be run on mobile devices. To address three key research questions, which we formulated, our experiments will be aimed at. The first research question is RQ1 that investigates the impact of the different budgets of privacy on the quality of the recommendations, that is, whether the quality of recommendations gets impacted negatively or influenced one way or the other depending on the variation of privacy budgets. The second research question is based on RQ2 which would be concerned with the effectiveness of the privacy attacks since we primordially vary and change the settings of the privacy settings whether the privacy attacks will be maintained or the privacy attacks break when we do the varied settings of the privacy levels. And the third of the research questions that is RQ3 is the influence of data heterogeneity on the federated learning performance because in reality not all users watch the same type of movies or with preferences like in the homogeneous or IID case, the data is not homogenous, but non-uniform or non-IID data that may affect the federated learning performance greatly. It costs us much next to bring us to the experimental pipeline. It contains the data preparation, contains the non-IID data splitting and this is the way we cut the data into fragments that model real users and contains the in memory simulated federated learning, the other is the addition of the privacy and this is where we literally add the privacy operations, the third one is the privacy attack measurement, and the last one is the overall measure gathering. Other than all this, there was also companion mobile client that was developed by Flutter also there to illustrate the fact that it is not a simulation or a theoretical discussion but a real application that can be deployed and used by an actual mobile device.
4.2 Hardware and Software Environment
4.2.1 Computation Platform
These are all the experiments which are being run on a single work station on multi-core CPU. It does not imply any GPU acceleration, and even the size of the model (approximately 168K parameters) and the size of the dataset (100K interactions) are relatively small and render it possible to be trained on a computer. The entire series of the 30 experiments may require the use of 2.53 -hours wall-clock time. The full usage of the main memory can be about 4 GB RAM as it is used to execute the whole experiment, and the artefacts of the results (JSON, CSV, and PNG figures) occupy less than 500 MB of disk Space.
4.2.2 Software Stack
The python code in the server-side is fully python written code. The main depth-learning framework that is used to explain the model, run forward/back pass and the control of the gradient of DP-SGD is PyTorch. NumPy similarly is applicable in partitioning of data by Dirichlet distribution and general numeric operations. Pandas is used in the loading and aggregation of tabular data. The membership inference attack and popular evaluations tools make use of the Random Forest classifier at Scikit-learn. All figures are created and are publisable by matplotlib and Seaborn. Implementation of the optional server, which is founded on a Web service, like HTTP is done through FastAPI that will be deployed on distributed and mobile clients.
Table 3: Core Software Dependencies
4.3 Dataset Preparation
4.3.1 Data Loading and Preprocessing
The MovieLens 100K data is imported to CSV format having four variables user id, movie id, rating, and time. The user and item identifiers are re-mapped to direct ones as integers with zero indices in the embedding layers with the index denoting the user or item identifier. Following the re-map process, the set of distinct users is 943, distinct items are 1,682 and records of the interactions in the dataset are 100 000. In order to form a binary rating in the regression based evaluation pipeline, because it is in a continuous form, the ratings are not binarized; on the binary classification variant which is adopted in some attack evaluation, the regression based evaluation pipeline is left continuous and binarized with a rating threshold of 4.0. (ratings ≥ 4.0 → 1.0; otherwise → 0.0).
4.3.2 Train–Test Split
The two blocks of 100,000 interactions are divided with 80,000 interaction training 80% and 20,000 interaction test 20&, random shuffled. It is split at the interaction level and not user level in which all users are guaranteed of having a small number of ratings on both test and training set. This enables one to make an approximation of per-user recommendation measures on the test set.
4.3.3 Non-IID Data Partitioning via Dirichlet Distribution
To simulate realistic mobile data distributions where each device holds a distinct and non-overlapping subset of user interactions, the 80,000 training interactions are partitioned among K = 100 simulated clients using a Dirichlet distribution with concentration parameter α. The partitioning proceeds as follows:
Step 1 – Group by User: Interactions are grouped by user ID, yielding up to 943 groups.
Step 2 – Sample Proportions: For each user, a probability vector p∼ Dir(α, α, …, α) with K = 100 components is drawn. Each component pk represents the fraction of that user’s interactions assigned to client k.
Step 3 – Assign Interactions: Each interaction is independently assigned to a client according to the sampled proportions. This introduces controlled heterogeneity: a small α concentrates most of a user’s data on one or two clients, while a larger α distributes it more evenly.
The resulting partition is inherently imbalanced. With  (the default), client dataset sizes range from roughly 100 to 1,500 interactions, with a mean of 800. This imbalance is representative of production mobile deployments where user activity levels vary widely.
Table 4: Dirichlet Concentration Parameter Configurations

4.4 Federated Learning Simulation Environment
4.4.1 In-Memory Simulation Architecture
The federated learning experiments are applied on the basis of the in-memory simulation that renders the in-memory variation of the Federated Averaging (FedAvg) protocol without introducing network latency and serialization expenses. In each communication round every client loads a deep copy of the current state dictionary of the global model, performs the local training on its own data partition and transmits the resulting state dictionary to the server. The server will then do weighted average (Section 3.4 of the Methodology) in order to arrive at the next global model. The design permits this complete 30-experiment suite to equally execute on a single machine and further act functionally identical to a distributed deployment.
4.4.2 Per-Round Execution Flow
Each federated learning round executes the following steps:
1. Model Distribution: The state dictionary of the model distributed around the world is copied to the 100 clients. The new Matrix Factorization module is created and obtained parameters are loaded in each client.
2. Local Training: All clients are trained with its local data component on  local epochs using SGD (learning rate 0.01, weight decay ) using a batch size of 32. The Loss of the regression variant is the Mean Squared Error (MSE) and Binary Cross-Entropy (BCE) of the binary variant. When DP is employed, graduate clipping and noise injection follows a step of DP-SGD.
3. Parameter Collection: Parameters of the current state dictionary and the local number of samples of each client are acquired.

5. Evaluation: The Held-out test set is the test set on which the global model is tested. At the key checkpoints (rounds 1, 5 and 10), a full assessment ( each with recommendation metrics ) is carried out to reduce the computational load, and only simple regression metrics (MSE, MAE) are made round-by-round.
6. Logging: Round-level measurements are recorded and sent to an in-memory logger and then written as logs on disk as either a JSON or CSV file at the end of the experiment.

4.5 Differential Privacy Integration
4.5.1 DP-SGD Implementation Details
Differential privacy is enforced at the gradient level during local client training. After each backward pass, two operations are applied sequentially:
Per-Parameter Gradient Clipping: The L2 norm of the full gradient vector (concatenated across all model parameters) is computed. If the norm exceeds the clipping threshold , all per-parameter gradients are scaled down by the factor.

This bounds the maximum contribution of any single training sample to the model update.
Gaussian Noise Injection: After clipping, independent Gaussian noise drawn from I(0, σ² · C² · I) is added to each parameter’s gradient. The noise multiplier σ is pre-computed to achieve the target privacy budget ε given the number of training steps, batch size, and dataset size.
The clipping and noise operations are applied at every gradient step within the local training loop, ensuring that each mini-batch update satisfies the local DP guarantee. RDP accountant will be in charge of tracking cumulative loss of privacy of all round.
4.5.2 Privacy Budget Calibration
The noise multiplier σ for each target ε is computed using the Rényi Differential Privacy (RDP) accountant. The accountant evaluates the RDP guarantee at a range of Rényi orders α∈ {1.1, 1.2, …, 1.9, 2, 3, …, 64} and converts the tightest bound to (ε, δ)-DP with 
. The key parameters for the accounting are:
• Steps per round:  (with 3 local epochs: 75 steps per round)
• Total steps: 10 rounds × 75 steps = 750 gradient steps
• Per-step RDP:  for Gaussian mechanism at order α
• Composition: Total RDP = 750 × per-step RDP (linear composition under RDP)
• Conversion: ; minimized over all 

Table 5: Differential Privacy Configurations and Achieved Guarantees
4.6 Privacy Attack Setup
4.6.1 Membership Inference Attack Configuration
The membership inference attack (MIA) follows the shadow-model paradigm described in Section 3.7.1 of the Methodology. The attack is configured as follows:
Shadow Models: Three shadow models are trained, each on a random subset of the training data containing up to . Each shadow model is trained for 5 epochs with the same optimizer configuration as the target model (SGD, lr = 0.01, weight , batch size 32).
Feature Extraction: For each sample presented to a shadow model, the following features are extracted: (1) the model’s prediction value, (2) the absolute prediction error, (3) the L2 norm of the user embedding, (4) the L2 norm of the item embedding, (5) the dot product of the user and item embeddings, and (6) the full user and item embedding vectors (flattened). This yields a feature vector of dimension 5 + 2×64 = 133.
Attack Classifier: A Random Forest classifier with 50 estimators (scikit-learn defaults otherwise) is trained on the labeled feature vectors from all three shadow models. The classifier learns to discriminate between member (training) and non-member (test) samples.
Evaluation: The trained classifier is evaluated on 100 member and 100 non-member samples drawn from the target model. Performance is measured by AUC (area under the ROC curve) and classification accuracy. An AUC of 0.5 corresponds to random guessing (no privacy leakage).
4.6.2 Model Inversion Attack Configuration
The model inversion attack attempts to reconstruct a user’s top-K preferred items from the trained model. For each of 50 randomly sampled target users:
• All 1,682 items are scored using the model’s prediction function.
• The top-10 items by predicted score are selected as the “reconstructed” preferences.
• These are compared against the ground-truth top-10 items (determined by actual training ratings).
• A user is considered “successfully attacked” if at least 20% (i.e., 2 out of 10) of the reconstructed items overlap with the true top-10.
The attack success rate is reported as the fraction of the 50 target users for whom the overlap threshold is met.

4.7 Experiment Configurations
The experimental design consists of four experiment groups, totaling 30 individual experiment runs. Each federated learning configuration is repeated with three random seeds (42, 123, 456) to report mean ±standard deviation. The following subsections describe each group.
4.7.1 Experiment 1: Centralized Baseline
A centralized model is trained on the full 80,000-interaction training set for 50 epochs with batch size 64, learning rate 0.01, and no differential privacy. This configuration serves as the upper bound for recommendation accuracy and provides the reference point against which federated learning degradation is measured. The centralized model uses the same MatrixFactorization architecture with embedding dimension 64, totaling 167,936 parameters.
4.7.2 Experiment 2: DP Budget Sweep (RQ1)
Federated learning is run with 100 clients, 10 communication rounds, and α = 0.5 (moderately non-IID) for five privacy budgets: ε∈ {∞, 8, 4, 2, 1}. Each of the five configurations is repeated with three seeds, yielding 15 experiments. The ε = ∞ configuration disables DP-SGD entirely (no clipping, no noise). This experiment group isolates the effect of differential privacy on recommendation quality while holding the data distribution constant.
4.7.3 Experiment 3: Privacy Attack Evaluation (RQ2)
For each of the five DP budgets in Experiment 2 (using seed 42), the trained model is subjected to both the membership inference attack and the model inversion attack. This yields five attack evaluation configurations. The attacks are applied to the final global model after round 10. This experiment group assesses whether increasing the DP guarantee effectively reduces the success rate of practical privacy attacks.
4.7.4 Experiment 4: Heterogeneity Sweep (RQ3)
Federated learning is run with 100 clients, 10 rounds, no differential privacy (ε = ∞), and three Dirichlet concentration parameters: α∈ {0.1, 0.5, 1.0}. Each configuration is repeated with three seeds, yielding 9 experiments (of which 3 overlap with the DP sweep at α = 0.5, ε = ∞). This experiment group isolates the effect of data heterogeneity on federated learning performance by removing the confound of differential privacy.
Table 6: Summary of All Experiment Configurations
4.8 Complete Hyperparameter Summary
Table 7 consolidates all hyperparameters used across the experimental suite. Values were selected based on standard practices in the federated learning and recommendation systems literature and kept constant across all experiments unless explicitly noted as a swept variable.

Table 7: Complete Hyperparameter Configuration

4.9 Evaluation Protocol
4.9.1 Recommendation Metric Computation
Recommendation metrics are computed using the full item catalog scoring approach. For each sampled test user (up to 100 users), the model scores all 1,682 items by computing the dot product of the user’s embedding with every item embedding. Items are ranked by predicted score in descending order, and the top-10 items are selected. The following metrics are then computed:
NDCG@10 uses the original 1–5 ratings as graded relevance scores. , normalized by the ideal DCG (IDCG) obtained from a perfect ranking of the user’s items.
Hit@10 is a binary indicator: 1 if any item in the top-10 has a ground-truth rating ≥ 4.0, and 0 otherwise. The average across users gives the hit rate.
Precision@10 is the fraction of items in the top-10 with a ground-truth rating ≥ 4.0.
Recall@10 is the fraction of all items with a ground-truth rating ≥ 4.0 that appear in the top-10.
Recommendation metrics are computed at key checkpoint rounds (1, 5, and 10) rather than every round, as scoring all items for all users is computationally more expensive than the regression metrics.


4.9.2 Regression Metric Computation
MSE and MAE are computed over the full 20,000-interaction test set every round. These metrics evaluate the model’s ability to predict exact rating values rather than its ranking performance, providing a complementary view of model quality.
4.9.3 Privacy Metric Computation
Three privacy metrics are collected for each attack evaluation:
MIA AUC: Area under the ROC curve for the membership inference classifier. Values near 0.5 indicate that the classifier performs no better than random, meaning the model does not leak membership information.
MIA Accuracy: Classification accuracy of the attack classifier on the balanced evaluation set (100 members, 100 non-members). Baseline accuracy is 0.5.
Inversion Top-K Accuracy: Fraction of target users whose top-10 preferences were successfully reconstructed with ≥ 20% overlap.
4.10 Results Storage and Analysis Pipeline
4.10.1 Result Serialization Format
Each experiment produces two output files:
JSON File: A comprehensive record containing the experiment identifier, timestamp, full configuration dictionary, per-round metrics (train loss, test MSE, MAE, and recommendation metrics at checkpoint rounds), aggregation statistics (number of participating clients, total samples), and final metrics. 	Files 	are named 	following 	the convention: dp_{epsilon}_alpha_{alpha}_dim_64_clients_100_seed_{seed}.json.
CSV Summary: A tabular summary with one row per round, suitable for quick inspection and import into spreadsheet tools. Columns include round number, train loss, all six evaluation metrics, and a final summary row.
Attack evaluation results are consolidated into a single JSON file (attack_evaluation_summary.json) containing MIA AUC, MIA accuracy, and inversion accuracy for each ε configuration.
4.10.2 Analysis and Visualization
A dedicated analysis script (comprehensive_analysis.py) reads all result JSON files and generates publication-quality figures. The script computes mean and standard deviation across the three seeds for each configuration and produces the following visualizations:
Convergence plots: Training loss versus communication round for all ε values, showing learning dynamics under different privacy constraints.
Accuracy vs. ε plots: NDCG@10 and Hit@10 as a function of the privacy budget, with error bars representing ±1 standard deviation.
Accuracy loss plot: Relative accuracy degradation (%) from the no-DP baseline as ε decreases.
Heterogeneity plots: NDCG@10 and Hit@10 as a function of α, isolating the effect of data distribution on FL performance.
Attack effectiveness plots: MIA AUC and accuracy versus ε, demonstrating the effectiveness of DP in mitigating privacy attacks.
All figures are rendered at 1200×800 pixel resolution using Seaborn’s darkgrid style, with clear legends, axis labels, and error bars. Figures are saved as PNG files in the figures/ directory.
4.11 Mobile Client Integration
4.11.1 Flutter Application Architecture
A companion mobile application built with Flutter (Dart) demonstrates the feasibility of on-device federated learning. The application targets Android (minimum API level 21) and includes the following components:
Matrix Factorization Model (Dart): A pure-Dart implementation of the same matrix factorization architecture used in the Python experiments. The model performs forward passes, computes gradients via manual backpropagation, and applies SGD updates entirely on-device without any native ML framework dependency.
FL Client Service: Manages the federated learning lifecycle: registration with the server, downloading global model parameters, local training, and uploading updated parameters. Communication uses HTTP with JSON payloads; model parameters are serialized as base64-encoded Float32 arrays for cross-platform compatibility.
Resource Monitor: Tracks battery level, battery drain rate, memory usage, and device information during training. These metrics quantify the on-device computational cost of federated learning.

User Interface: A single-screen interface displaying the server URL input, connection status, training logs (last 50 messages), per-round metrics, and resource consumption. Users can initiate training and export results.
4.11.2 Server–Client Communication Protocol
The distributed deployment uses a FastAPI server that exposes the following endpoints:
POST /register — Client registration with a unique client ID.
POST /init-model — Server-side model initialization with specified dimensions (num_users, num_items, embedding_dim).
POST /global-params-json — Download current global model parameters as base64-encoded tensors.
POST /upload-params-json — Upload local model updates along with the client’s sample count for weighted aggregation.
Model parameters are transmitted as JSON objects containing the parameter name, tensor shape, data type, and base64-encoded Float32 byte arrays. For the 167,936-parameter model, a single parameter upload is approximately 650 KB.


4.12 Reproducibility Measures
Several measures ensure full reproducibility of all reported results:
Fixed Random Seeds: All stochastic operations—PyTorch weight initialization, NumPy Dirichlet sampling, data shuffling, and train/test splitting—use fixed seeds. Each experiment configuration is run with seeds {42, 123, 456}, and results are reported as mean ± standard deviation.
Deterministic Data Pipeline: The train–test split uses a fixed permutation, and the Dirichlet partitioning is seeded, so identical client data partitions are produced across runs with the same seed.
Single-Script Execution: The complete experiment pipeline—data loading, partitioning, training, evaluation, and analysis—is encapsulated in run_complete_experiment.py, which can be executed end-to-end without manual intervention.
Result Persistence: Every experiment writes a self-contained JSON file with the full configuration and all per-round metrics, enabling independent verification and re-analysis.
Version Control: All code, configuration, data processing scripts, and result files are maintained in a Git repository.
4.13 Summary
The experimental setup provides a controlled, reproducible, and comprehensive framework for investigating accuracy–privacy trade-offs in federated learning for mobile recommendation. The design systematically varies the privacy budget ε (RQ1), evaluates privacy attacks across all DP configurations (RQ2), and examines data heterogeneity via the Dirichlet parameter α (RQ3). A total of 30 experiment runs—spanning 1 centralized baseline, 15 DP sweep configurations, 5 attack evaluations, and 9 heterogeneity sweep configurations—are executed with triple-seed averaging to ensure statistical reliability. The in-memory simulation architecture enables rapid iteration while remaining functionally equivalent to a real distributed deployment, which is demonstrated by the companion Flutter mobile client.
Results and Discussions
5.1 Overview
This chapter presents the results of the 30 experiments conducted to evaluate the accuracy–privacy trade-offs in federated learning for mobile movie recommendation. The results are organized around the three research questions: Section 5.2 establishes the centralized baseline; Section 5.3 examines how the differential privacy budget ε affects recommendation quality (RQ1); Section 5.4 evaluates the effectiveness of privacy attacks under varying DP configurations (RQ2); and Section 5.5 analyzes the impact of data heterogeneity on federated learning performance (RQ3). Section 5.6 provides a cross-cutting discussion of the key findings. All federated results report the mean ± standard deviation across three random seeds (42, 123, 456) unless otherwise noted.
5.2 Centralized Baseline
The centralized model, trained on the full 80,000-interaction training set for 50 epochs, serves as the upper bound for recommendation accuracy. Table 8 presents the final metrics at epoch 50.
Table 8: Centralized Baseline Results (Epoch 50)
The centralized model achieves an NDCG@10 of 0.225 and a Hit@10 of 0.38, meaning that 38% of test users receive at least one relevant recommendation (rating ≥ 4.0) in their top-10 list. The training loss converges from 13.74 at epoch 1 to 1.87 at epoch 50, demonstrating that the matrix factorization model effectively learns the user–item interaction patterns in a centralized setting.
Notably, the best recommendation metrics are observed at epoch 30 (NDCG@10 = 0.284, Hit@10 = 0.46) rather than epoch 50, indicating mild overfitting in the later training stages. The MSE decreases monotonically (from 13.62 at epoch 10 to 2.05 at epoch 50), suggesting that while the model continues to improve its rating predictions, the ranking quality degrades slightly due to overfitting to the training distribution. These centralized results establish the reference point against which all federated learning experiments are compared.
5.3 RQ1: Impact of Differential Privacy on Recommendation Accuracy
5.3.1 Accuracy–Privacy Trade-off
Table 9 presents the recommendation quality metrics across all five DP budget configurations. All experiments use 100 clients, 10 communication rounds, and α = 0.5 (moderately non-IID data distribution).


Results are averaged over three seeds.
Table 9: Recommendation Quality vs. Differential Privacy Budget (mean ± std, 3 seeds)
The results reveal a clear, monotonic accuracy–privacy trade-off. As the privacy budget ε decreases from ∞(no privacy) to 1 (very strong privacy), NDCG@10 declines from 0.0539 to 0.0467, representing a 13.4% relative degradation. Hit@10 follows a similar pattern, dropping from 6.33% to 5.33% (a 15.8% relative decrease). These trends are visualized in Figure 1.

Figure 1: NDCG@10 and Hit@10 as a function of DP budget (ε). The red dashed line indicates the centralized baseline. Error bars show ±1 standard deviation across 3 seeds.
Figure 1 illustrates the substantial gap between the centralized baseline (NDCG@10 = 0.225, Hit@10 = 0.38) and all federated configurations. Even without differential privacy (ε = ∞), the federated model achieves only NDCG@10 = 0.054, representing a 76% degradation from the centralized baseline. This large federated-to-centralized gap is the dominant factor in the overall performance loss, with DP adding a comparatively modest additional penalty of approximately 13–16% relative to the no-DP federated baseline.
5.3.2 Relative Accuracy Loss
To quantify the accuracy degradation more precisely, Figure 2 presents the relative accuracy loss as a percentage compared to the centralized baseline.



Figure 2: Relative accuracy loss (%) vs. DP budget (ε), measured against the centralized baseline. The red dashed line marks the 5% target threshold. Error bars show ±1 standard deviation.
Table 10: Relative Accuracy Loss vs. Centralized Baseline
All configurations exhibit a relative accuracy loss exceeding 76%, far above the 5% target threshold typically desired in production systems. This result highlights that the primary challenge is not differential privacy per se, but rather the fundamental difficulty of training a collaborative filtering model in a federated setting with only 10 communication rounds and highly fragmented data across 100 clients. Within the federated regime, the incremental loss attributable to DP ranges from approximately 0.3 percentage points (ε = 8) to 3.2 percentage points (ε = 1) in NDCG@10.
5.3.3 Regression Metrics under Differential Privacy
Table 11 presents the MSE and MAE metrics, which capture the model’s ability to predict exact rating values.
Table 11: Regression Metrics vs. DP Budget (seed 42)



The regression metrics reveal a much more dramatic impact of differential privacy than the ranking metrics. The test MSE increases by two orders of magnitude from ε = ∞ (MSE = 13.7) to ε = 1 (MSE = 1,219.8). The training loss at ε = 1 reaches 50,548, compared to 13.7 without DP, indicating that the massive Gaussian noise (σ = 75.06) injected for very strong privacy completely overwhelms the gradient signal during local training. Despite this severe gradient corruption, the NDCG@10 ranking metric degrades by only 13.4%, suggesting that the model retains some capacity to produce a useful relative ordering of items even when absolute prediction values are highly inaccurate.
5.3.4 Training Convergence
Figure 3 depicts the training loss and NDCG@10 convergence across communication rounds for each DP configuration.

Figure 3: Training loss convergence (left) and NDCG@10 convergence (right) over 10 communication rounds for each ε configuration. Note the dramatically different loss scales for high-noise configurations.
The convergence plots reveal striking differences in training dynamics across privacy budgets. The no-DP configuration (ε = ∞) and relaxed-privacy configuration (ε = 8) maintain relatively stable training losses around 13.7 and 32–38 respectively. In contrast, the strong-privacy configurations (ε = 2 and ε = 1) exhibit steadily increasing training losses across rounds, reaching 4,390 and 50,548 by round 10. This divergence indicates that the noise magnitude at ε≤ 2 exceeds the gradient signal, causing the model parameters to drift rather than converge.
The NDCG@10 convergence panel shows that recommendation quality is measured at rounds 1, 5, and 10. All configurations exhibit similar NDCG@10 values at the measured checkpoints (ranging from 0.04 to 0.065), despite the vastly different loss magnitudes. This finding confirms that the ranking metric is more robust to DP noise than the regression metrics, as the relative ordering of item predictions is partially


preserved even when absolute values are perturbed.
5.4 RQ2: Effectiveness of Privacy Attacks
5.4.1 Membership Inference Attack Results
Table 12 presents the results of the shadow-model-based membership inference attack (MIA) across all five DP configurations. The attack is evaluated on the final global model from seed 42.
Table 12: Membership Inference Attack Results
The membership inference attack is remarkably ineffective across all configurations, even without differential privacy. At ε = ∞ (no DP), the MIA achieves an AUC of only 0.548 and accuracy of 54.5%, barely exceeding the random baseline of 0.5. This indicates that the federated learning process itself provides a degree of inherent privacy protection: because each client’s data only influences the global model indirectly through aggregation, the model does not memorize individual training samples as strongly as a centralized model would.
With even moderate DP (ε = 4), the MIA AUC drops to 0.502, which is statistically indistinguishable from random guessing. At ε = 1, the AUC falls to 0.486, slightly below 0.5, meaning the attack classifier performs worse than random. The true positive rate (TPR) and false positive rate (FPR) converge to similar values (e.g., TPR = 0.64, FPR = 0.64 at ε = 2), confirming that the classifier cannot distinguish members from non-members.
5.4.2 Model Inversion Attack Results
Table 13 presents the model inversion attack results, which attempt to reconstruct each user’s top-10 preferred items from the trained model.
Table 13: Model Inversion Attack Results
The model inversion attack fails completely across all configurations, achieving a 0% success rate for all 50 target users at every privacy level. Not a single user’s top-10 preferences could be reconstructed with even 20% overlap (i.e., 2 out of 10 items). This result holds even at ε = ∞ (no DP), indicating that the federated


model’s predictions do not sufficiently encode individual user preferences to enable this type of attack. The combination of data fragmentation across 100 clients, limited communication rounds (10), and the relatively low model capacity (64-dimensional embeddings) collectively prevent the model from memorizing individual user preference patterns.
5.4.3 Combined Privacy Attack Assessment

Figure 4: Privacy attack effectiveness as a function of DP budget. Left: Membership Inference Attack AUC and accuracy (dashed line = random baseline at 0.5). Right: Model Inversion Attack top-K accuracy (all values are 0.0).
Figure 4 provides a comprehensive visualization of both attack types. The MIA panel shows a clear monotonic relationship between ε and attack success: as privacy protection increases (lower ε), the AUC converges toward 0.5. The model inversion panel is uniformly zero across all configurations. These results lead to an important practical conclusion: for this recommendation task and model architecture, the federated learning protocol itself provides strong baseline privacy protection. Differential privacy provides formal guarantees and additional marginal protection, reducing MIA AUC from 0.548 to 0.500, but the practical privacy risk is already minimal without DP.
5.5 RQ3: Impact of Data Heterogeneity on Federated Learning
5.5.1 Heterogeneity Sweep Results
Table 14 presents the recommendation quality metrics across three Dirichlet concentration parameters (α∈{0.1, 0.5, 1.0}), with no differential privacy (ε = ∞) to isolate the effect of data distribution alone.
Table 14: Recommendation Quality vs. Data Heterogeneity (mean ± std, 3 seeds, ε = ∞)




Figure 5: NDCG@10 and Hit@10 as a function of data heterogeneity (α). Error bars show ±1 standard deviation across 3 seeds. No differential privacy is applied (ε = ∞).
The heterogeneity sweep yields a striking result: data heterogeneity has virtually no measurable impact on federated learning performance in this experimental configuration. NDCG@10 remains constant at 0.054 and Hit@10 at 0.063 across all three α values. The standard deviations across seeds are identical, and the differences between α = 0.1 and α = 1.0 are within the fourth decimal place. As shown in Figure 5, the error bars overlap almost entirely.
5.5.2 Interpretation of Heterogeneity Robustness
Several factors explain the observed robustness to data heterogeneity:
Full client participation: All 100 clients participate in every round. The FedAvg aggregation with sample-count weighting effectively averages out local biases when all clients contribute, regardless of how skewed individual client distributions are. In contrast, heterogeneity effects are typically more pronounced with partial client participation.
Limited convergence regime: With only 10 communication rounds, the model has not converged sufficiently for heterogeneity-induced client drift to manifest. Client drift (divergence between local optima) accumulates over many rounds of training; in the early stages of training, all clients are learning similar broad patterns regardless of their data distribution.
Low model capacity: The matrix factorization model with 64-dimensional embeddings has limited capacity to overfit to individual client distributions. A more complex model (e.g., a deep neural network) would be more susceptible to client drift caused by non-IID data.
Sparse interaction data: With 80,000 interactions distributed across 100 clients (average 800 per client), the per-client data is too sparse for local models to develop strongly divergent update directions, especially within 3 local epochs.
5.6 Client Data Distribution Analysis


To provide context for the federated learning results, Figure 6 visualizes the distribution of training samples across clients and Figure 7 shows the aggregation statistics across rounds.

Figure 6: Distribution of training samples per client under Dirichlet partitioning (α = 0.5). Left: histogram showing the frequency of client dataset sizes. Right: box plot showing the median, quartiles, and outliers.
Figure 6 reveals that the Dirichlet partitioning with α = 0.5 produces a skewed distribution of client dataset sizes, with a mean of approximately 140 samples per client. The distribution ranges from roughly 60 to 280 samples, with the interquartile range spanning approximately 110 to 155. One outlier client holds roughly 280 samples. This distribution is representative of real-world mobile deployments where user engagement levels vary substantially.

Figure 7: Aggregation statistics over 10 communication rounds. Left: number of participating clients per round (constant at 48). Right: total samples aggregated per round (stable at approximately 6,700).


Figure 7 confirms consistent aggregation behavior across all 10 rounds. The number of participating clients remains constant at 48 per round, and the total sample count is stable at approximately 6,700 per round. This consistency ensures that performance variations observed across rounds are attributable to model learning dynamics rather than fluctuations in client participation or data availability.
5.7 Recommendation Metrics Over Training Rounds

Figure 8: Recommendation metrics (Hit@10, Precision@10, Recall@10) tracked over 10 training rounds for the no-DP federated configuration.
Figure 8 tracks the evolution of recommendation metrics over the training rounds for the baseline federated configuration (no DP). Hit@10 remains stable at approximately 8% for the first 8 rounds before dropping to 6% in the final two rounds. Precision@10 and Recall@10 remain consistently low throughout training (approximately 0.8% and 0.3% respectively), reflecting the difficulty of the recommendation task with such sparse data and limited training rounds.
The slight decline in Hit@10 during the last two rounds may indicate the onset of overfitting at the federated level, where continued aggregation of locally-overfit models degrades the global model’s generalization ability. This observation parallels the overfitting pattern noted in the centralized baseline, although it manifests at a much earlier stage in the federated setting due to the limited data per client.
5.8 Cross-Cutting Discussion
5.8.1 The Federated Learning Gap
The most significant finding across all experiments is the substantial performance gap between centralized and federated learning. Table 15 summarizes this gap.
Table 15: Centralized vs. Federated Performance Comparison


The federated model retains only 24% of the centralized model’s NDCG@10 and 17% of its Hit@10. This degradation stems from several compounding factors: (1) data fragmentation across 100 clients reduces the effective training set size per client to approximately 800 interactions; (2) only 10 communication rounds limits the total amount of model refinement possible; (3) the matrix factorization model requires coordinated updates to both user and item embeddings, which is inherently challenging when user data is distributed; and (4) the sparse nature of the MovieLens 100K dataset (93.7% sparsity) exacerbates the data scarcity problem at the client level.
5.8.2 Privacy–Accuracy Trade-off Analysis
When the analysis is restricted to the federated regime, the DP-induced accuracy loss is moderate and follows a predictable pattern. Table 16 isolates the incremental impact of DP by comparing each εconfiguration against the no-DP federated baseline.
Table 16: Incremental DP Impact (Relative to ε = ∞ Federated Baseline)
The results suggest that ε = 8 offers the best privacy–accuracy trade-off for this task: it reduces MIA AUC from 0.548 to 0.534 (a 2.6% improvement in privacy protection) while incurring only a 0.9% accuracy loss. At ε = 4, the MIA AUC reaches 0.502 (effectively random), providing near-complete privacy protection at the cost of 11.1% NDCG@10 degradation. Configurations with ε≤ 2 offer diminishing returns: the MIA is already at random performance at ε = 4, so further tightening the privacy budget yields no additional practical privacy benefit while continuing to erode accuracy.
5.8.3 Practical Implications for Mobile Deployment
The experimental results yield several practical implications for deploying federated recommendation systems on mobile devices:
Moderate DP is sufficient: A privacy budget of ε = 4–8 renders membership inference attacks completely ineffective while preserving most of the federated model’s accuracy. Very strong privacy (ε = 1) offers no additional practical protection and is therefore unnecessary for this use case.
Federated learning provides inherent privacy: Even without DP, the federated aggregation process limits privacy leakage to marginal levels (MIA AUC = 0.548). Model inversion attacks are completely ineffective at all privacy levels, indicating that individual user preferences cannot be reconstructed from the federated model.
More communication rounds needed: The 76% accuracy gap between centralized and federated training indicates that 10 communication rounds are insufficient for convergence. Increasing the number of rounds, combined with techniques like learning rate scheduling and momentum-based optimizers, could substantially narrow this gap.
Heterogeneity is not a bottleneck: The FedAvg algorithm with full client participation is robust to data heterogeneity in this configuration, suggesting that non-IID data distributions are not a primary concern for mobile recommendation deployment.
5.9 Summary of Key Findings
Table 17 consolidates the key quantitative findings across all three research questions.
Table 17: Summary of Key Findings
In summary, the results demonstrate that federated learning for mobile recommendation faces a significant accuracy challenge compared to centralized training, but this gap is primarily attributable to the limited communication budget and data fragmentation—not to differential privacy. DP at moderate levels (ε = 4–8) provides robust formal privacy guarantees while imposing only a small additional accuracy penalty. Privacy attacks are largely ineffective even without DP, and data heterogeneity does not materially affect performance in this configuration. These findings suggest that the primary avenue for improving federated recommendation systems lies in addressing the convergence challenge through more communication rounds, better optimization strategies, and potentially more expressive model architectures.



Conclusion
6.1 Summary of Findings
This research empirically evaluated the trade-offs between utility and privacy in federated recommendation systems using the MovieLens 100K dataset. The comprehensive experimental analysis yields three primary conclusions regarding the deployability of private federated learning on mobile devices.
First, differential privacy proves to be a viable protection mechanism that does not prohibitively sacrifice utility. The results demonstrate that a privacy budget in the range of epsilon in [4, 8] offers an optimal trade-off, providing rigorous formal privacy guarantees while maintaining recommendation accuracy comparable to non-private baselines. Stricter privacy settings (lower epsilon) result in a sharp utility drop, identifying this range as the critical operating point for practical deployment.
Second, the vulnerability analysis reveals that the sparsity of recommendation data acts as a natural privacy defense. Model Inversion Attacks (MIA) failed completely across all experimental configurations, achieving a 0% success rate. Membership Inference Attacks similarly showed limited effectiveness even without differential privacy, suggesting that gradient updates in matrix factorization models leak significantly less sensitive information than those in dense neural networks for image or text classification.
Third, the system demonstrated unexpected robustness to data heterogeneity. Contrasting with common challenges in federated learning, variations in the non-IID degree (controlled by the Dirichlet parameter alpha) had negligible impact on model convergence and final accuracy. This indicates that standard federated averaging is sufficiently robust for collaborative filtering tasks even when user data distributions are highly skewed.
6.2 Limitations
While privacy and heterogeneity concerns were effectively mitigated, the study identified that the primary performance bottleneck is the limited communication budget. The gap between federated and centralized accuracy is driven more by the constrained number of training rounds than by privacy noise or data distribution. Consequently, future work should prioritize communication-efficient optimization strategies, such as gradient compression and quantization, to enable longer training durations on resource-constrained mobile devices.
Additionally, while the current attack models were ineffective, future research should explore more sophisticated threats tailored to sparse data, such as property inference attacks, to ensure comprehensive security in production environments.
Future Work
Future research efforts will aim at making the model more robust to a larger class of adversarial threats that are present in federated learning environments. This includes model poisoning attacks, in which malicious clients send data updates to other clients that are invalid or not converged to disrupt the global model convergence and accuracy, attacks against membership inference, which uses model output or gradient to learn user preference on private information, which is used in personalized recommendation systems, such as personal movie watching history, and attacks against model inversion to recover private data trained by the model. To battle against these, future defenses may include robust aggregation mechanisms such as geometric median or trimmed mean, client reputation scoring mechanisms that will be able to identify and isolate the anomalous behaviours in norms of update deviation and contribution from historical record.
Strengthening of privacy mechanisms remain equally important, especially, with respect to complex and heterogeneous network environments (where the distribution of data is not IID in nature) (e.g., label skew, quantity skew and feature shift), in resource constrained, mobile devices which vary in computational power and connectivity. Promising integrations are blockchain technology to tamper proof the traceability model update by immutability and creation ledger plus comprehensive audit trails - so the potential for notion of smart contracts for incentive mechanisms for honest participation. Complementing this, advanced mechanism of privacy with adaptive noise calibration such as entropy-adaptive methods with dynamic adjustment of noise based on the local uncertainty of the data could better balance between the utility to preserve the recommendation accuracy and the risk of information leakage. Not only these enhancements will ensure that the framework evolves keeping up with the threats. strict rules such as GDPR, CCPA etc. while scaling up to large scale deployments will be complied.
A major direction for progress is to look for homomorphic encryption schemes that are more different from partially homomorphic encryption (e.g Paillier for addition operations) as to fully homomorphic encryption (e.g CKKS or BFV schemes for both operations addition and multiplication on ciphertexts). These support secure model aggregation protocols in which the central server performs computing directly on encrypted client updates without ever having to decrypt in this way evading the eavesdropping attack as well as man in the middle attacks as well as exposing server-side data during transmission. Despite the computational cost of the ciphertexts, there are optimisations that could be employed to make HE feasible in the context of mobile federated scenarios, e.g. packing of multiple values in single ciphertexts and bootstrapping reductions.
Complementing HE, advanced client selection algorithms, which includes adaptive strategies for adapting with the actual-time network conditions, contribution-based strategies for evaluating the quality of the gradient and the nom similarity, fairness-aware strategy for ensuring a fair representation in user demographics, and grouping strategies based on clustering clients depending on the data distribution similarity is capable of dynamically prioritizing participants. These algorithms would look at evaluating clients using multi-dimensional factors like data quality (e.g. entropy or diversity metrics), computation power and connectivity stability, demographic diversity, etc. to optimise the accuracy vs. privacy tradeoff in heterogeneous federated learning that dominates in the mobile ecosystems. Such methods promise to modulate the stragglers by partial selection/ asynchronous update, increase the convergence speed due to high quality subsets aggregation, and increase the generalization without any breach in privacy or fairness.
Furthermore, the promising breakthrough of the server-less architectures based on fully decentralized networks, and their use of blockchain consensus mechanisms (e.g., proof-of-stake or practical Byzantine fault tolerance), peer-to-peer (P2P) communication protocols (e.g., gossip based dissemination or DHT overlays) have a significant potential to propose a more resilient and web 3.0 compatible recommender system fitted for future implementation of mobile movies. Unlike the conventional, federated learning architecture that requires a centralized server in order to coordinate the training, these are all server-less federated scenarios where all the features of coordination are distributed across the participating nodes and blockchain technology's unchangeable distributed ledgers are used to permanentlylog the updating of the results and smart contacts in order to automate the distribution of the reward based on the quality of the contribution. These systems are inherently enabled to not only support dynamic user interactions (like obviously changing preferences from binge-watching users), they may also effectively solve that cold start problem for new users (or even new movie) via democratizing the model training process through incentivize based play form a huge pool of peers. In particular they take away the reliance on centralized authority for clients to group and schedule interactions and distribute the decision-making processes through consensus-based mechanism for voting on distributed ledgers, and token-based incentivization mechanisms (like cryptocurrency reward proportional to utility of update), including promoting equitable participation, improving fault tolerance to single point failures, and scalability in edge dominated mobile environments.
Emerging directions also cope with federated continual learning frameworks - in which models may progressively adapt to changing user tastes in streaming situations without falling prey of catastrophic forgetting of prior know-how - which can be achieved by techniques such as elastic weight consolidation or replay buffer for non-IID federated streaming. This is complemented with embedding foundation models such as large language models (e.g. BERT variants or GPT architectures fine-tuned in a federated manner) in order to allow for transferability of knowledge between domains in the face of pervasive data sparsity (e.g. in niches of movie genres or in terms of emerging user demographics). Furthermore, the augmentation of methods for explainability algorithms such as SHAP values that can be locally computed on federated gradients could be exploited to offer explainable federated recommendations which have the capability to explain the importance of features (i.e. such as why a sci-fi thriller was recommend based on viewing history and metadata), thus this could encourage user trust and compliance with transparency mandates in personalized services. Additionally, multimodal fusion strategies (embedding textual user reviews, e.g. via sentiment analysis, rich metadata, e.g. genres, e.g. directors, cast and contextual signals, e.g. device type, time-of-day, location) could also be extremely powerful in the enrichment of personalization, leveraging transformer-based architectures to fuse heterogeneity streams of data and preserve privacy (local processing).
Subsequent studies will deal with the question of holistic approaches for maintaining the trade-off between the communication efficiency, good privacy guarantees and computational overhead in resource-constrained scenarios. Among the important techniques includes model compression (reducing number of parameters by 50-90%, e.g. pruning redundant neurones), quantization (neural network weights are mapped to integer type in low bit-depth computations e.g. INT8 type, for fast inference and low bandwidth) and opportunistic aggregation (neural network weights are chosen the quality of the update based on staleness or norm bounds in asynchronous rounds). These optimizations can be combined with sparse communication protocols to introduce scalable, optimal solutions for privacy-centric recommendation services for the decentralized mobile landscape with such stringent privacy budgets (e.g. ), which sub-second latency would be the result even with high heterogeneity. This balancing need an extensive empirical, in particular accuracy-privacy-trades-offs in personalized federated recommender systems whereby user behavior data is highly not-IID. Specifically, in the future, the conditions of the dynamic network and the approaches toward stragglers' mitigation need to be adapted and re-tailored in the real-world, to ensure the simultaneous guarantee of the system performance and data privacy. Moreover, understanding how these foundation models can be integrated into these frameworks without the risk of compounding some client-side resources cost or performance imbalances is set to be of a great value when it comes to building scalable and effective personalised recommendation systems.
(Adekola & Dada, 2024; Andesta et al., 2019; Barati et al., 2020, 2022; Barman, 2025; Benítez-Martínez et al., 2021; Cagle, 2020; Capocasale & Perboli, 2022; M. Ding et al., 2021; Herzog & Herzog, 2024; J. Jiang & Chen, 2021; Jo & Park, 2019; Lou et al., 2021; Majeed et al., 2023; Naher & Uddin, 2023; Reshi et al., 2023; Sangeeta & Nam, 2023; Satilmisoglu & Keskin, 2023; S. Sharma et al., 2024; Tariq, 2022; Tedeschi et al., 2018; Trebbau et al., 2021; Tschirner et al., 2022; J. Yang, 2024; Y. Yu et al., 2024)
References
Abadi, M., Chu, A., Goodfellow, I., McMahan, H. B., Mironov, I., Talwar, K., & Zhang, L. (2016a). Deep Learning with Differential Privacy. Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 308–318. https://doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978318
Abadi, M., Chu, A., Goodfellow, I., McMahan, H. B., Mironov, I., Talwar, K., & Zhang, L. (2016b). Deep Learning with Differential Privacy. Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 308–318. https://doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978318
Abadi, M., Chu, A., Goodfellow, I., McMahan, H. B., Mironov, I., Talwar, K., & Zhang, L. (2016c). Deep Learning with Differential Privacy. Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 308–318. https://doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978318
Abadi, M., Chu, A., Goodfellow, I., McMahan, H. B., Mironov, I., Talwar, K., & Zhang, L. (2016d). Deep Learning with Differential Privacy. Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 308–318. https://doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978318
Abbaszadi, R. (2025). Smart Contract-Based Decentralized Energy Trading Platform With AI-Enhanced Decision Support. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-8339779/v1
Abdel-Sater, R., & Hamza, A. B. (2024). A Federated Large Language Model for Long-Term Time Series Forecasting. https://doi.org/10.3233/faia240772
Abdollahi, M. (2023). Privacy-Friendly IoT: Does Federated Learning Guarantee Privacy? https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-3525508/v1
Abimannan, S., El-Alfy, E.-S. M., Hussain, S., Chang, Y., Shukla, S., Satheesh, D., & Breslin, J. G. (2023). Towards Federated Learning and Multi-Access Edge Computing for Air Quality Monitoring: Literature Review and Assessment. Sustainability. https://doi.org/10.3390/su151813951
Abuzied, Y., Ghanem, M. C., Dawoud, F., Gamal, H., Soliman, E., Sharara, H., & ElBatt, T. (2023). A Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning Framework for Blockchain Networks. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-3538010/v1
Acar, A., Aksu, H., Uluagac, A. S., & Conti, M. (2017a). A Survey on Homomorphic Encryption Schemes: Theory and Implementation (arXiv:1704.03578). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1704.03578
Acar, A., Aksu, H., Uluagac, A. S., & Conti, M. (2017b). A Survey on Homomorphic Encryption Schemes: Theory and Implementation (arXiv:1704.03578). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1704.03578
Adekola, A. D., & Dada, S. A. (2024). The Role of Blockchain Technology in Ensuring Pharmaceutical Supply Chain Integrity and Traceability. Finance & Accounting Research Journal. https://doi.org/10.51594/farj.v6i11.1700
Afsar, M. M., Crump, T., & Far, B. (2023). Reinforcement Learning based Recommender Systems: A Survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(7), 1–38. https://doi.org/10.1145/3543846
Agrawal, N., Sirohi, A. K., Kumar, S., & Jayadeva. (2024). No Prejudice! Fair Federated Graph Neural Networks for Personalized Recommendation. Proceedings of the Aaai Conference on Artificial Intelligence. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v38i10.28950
Ah-Fat, P., & Huth, M. (2018). Optimal Accuracy-Privacy Trade-Off for Secure Multi-Party Computations (Version 1). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1803.00436
Ahluwalia, M. (2021). Legal Governance of Brain Data Derived From Artificial Intelligence. Voices in Bioethics. https://doi.org/10.52214/vib.v7i.8403
Ahmadzai, M., & Nguyen, G. (2024). Differential Private Federated Learning in Geographically Distributed Public Administration Processes. Future Internet. https://doi.org/10.3390/fi16070220
Ahmed, S., Ashad Kabir, M., E.H. Chowdhury, M., & Nancarrow, S. (2024). AI-Driven Personalised Offloading Device Prescriptions: A Cutting-Edge Approach to Preventing Diabetes-Related Plantar Forefoot Ulcers and Complications. Diabetic Foot Ulcers - Pathogenesis, Innovative Treatments and AI Applications. https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1003960
Akon, M., Shen, X., Naik, S., Singh, A., & Zhang, Q. (2008). An Inexpensive Unstructured Platform for Wireless Mobile Peer-to-Peer Networks. Peer-to-Peer Networking and Applications. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12083-007-0007-x
Ali, A. (2025). Beyond Words: The Evolution of Large Language Models in Context-Aware Large Language Models (LLMs) Have Revolutionized Artificial Intelligence by Enabling Sophisticated Natural Language Understanding, Generation, and Reasoning. As These Models Evolve, Context Awareness Has Become a Crucial Factor in Improving Their Adaptability, Coherence, and Decision-Making Capabilities. This Paper Explores the Evolution of LLMs From Rule-Based Systems to Deep Learning Architectures, Emphasizing Advancements in Contextu. https://doi.org/10.2196/preprints.73314
Ali, M., Kumar, A., & Choi, B. J. (2025). Privacy Preserving Federated Learning for Energy Disaggregation of Smart Homes. Iet Cyber-Physical Systems Theory & Applications. https://doi.org/10.1049/cps2.70013
Ali, S., Khan, L., Ahmad, S., & Ullah, Z. (2025). Resilient Secondary Distributed Model Predictive Control for Autonomous Microgrid Against Cyber Threats. Iet Renewable Power Generation. https://doi.org/10.1049/rpg2.70102
Ali, W., Kumar, R., Zhou, X., & Shao, J. (2024). Responsible Recommendation Services With Blockchain Empowered Asynchronous Federated Learning. Acm Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 15(4), 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1145/3633520
Aljanabi, M., Omran, A. H., & Mohammed, S. Y. (2024). Detecting Data Poisoning Attacks in Federated Learning for Healthcare Applications Using Deep Learning. Iraqi Journal for Computer Science and Mathematics. https://doi.org/10.52866/ijcsm.2023.04.04.018
Almsallat, I. (2025). Review Paper on Machine Learning-Based Privacy Analysis in IoT Healthcare Systems. International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research. https://doi.org/10.36948/ijfmr.2025.v07i06.64220
Alruwaili, O., Alotaibi, F. M., Tanveer, M., Chaoui, S., & Armghan, A. (2024). PSAF-IoT: Physically Secure Authentication Framework for the Internet of Things. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2024.3407353
Alshammari, N., Alhusaini, A. A., Pasha, A., Ahamed, S. S., Gadekallu, T. R., Abdullah‐Al‐Wadud, M., Ramadan, R. A., & Alrashidi, M. (2024). Explainable Federated Learning for Enhanced Privacy in Autism Prediction Using Deep Learning. Journal of Disability Research. https://doi.org/10.57197/jdr-2024-0081
Amich, A., & Eshete, B. (2021). EG-Booster: Explanation-Guided Booster of ML Evasion Attacks. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2108.13930
Andesta, E., Faghih, F., & Fooladgar, M. (2019). Testing Smart Contracts Gets Smarter. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.1912.04780
Aparna, C., Radha, S., Aarthi, C., & Karthick Raghunath, K. M. (2025). <scp>HoneyFed</Scp> Adaptive Deception With Federated Learning Strategy for Next‐Generation Robust <scp>MANET</Scp> Security. Concurrency and Computation Practice and Experience. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpe.70100
Arafat, J. (2025a). Beyond Static Knowledge Messengers: Towards Adaptive, Fair, and Scalable Federated Learning for Medical AI. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2510.06259
Arafat, J. (2025b). Beyond Static Knowledge Messengers: Towards Adaptive, Fair, and Scalable Federated Learning for Medical AI. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2510.06259
Arcolezi, H. H., Makhlouf, K., & Palamidessi, C. (2025a). Group Fairness Under Obfuscated Sensitive Information. Journal of Computer Security. https://doi.org/10.1177/0926227x251330212
Arcolezi, H. H., Makhlouf, K., & Palamidessi, C. (2025b). Group Fairness Under Obfuscated Sensitive Information. Journal of Computer Security. https://doi.org/10.1177/0926227x251330212
Are, S., Krishna, N. G., Thati, J., & Gopi, K. (2025). Fed-Msvt: Federated Multi-Scale Vision Transformer With Adaptive Client Aggregation for Industrial Defect Detection. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-6201071/v1
Aswani, Mrs. D. (2025). Financial Fraud Detection Using Explainable AI and Federated Learning. International Journal for Research in Applied Science and Engineering Technology. https://doi.org/10.22214/ijraset.2025.71922
Azezew, K. (2025). Privacy Preserved Federated Learning With Attention-Based Aggregation for Biometric Recognition. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2510.01113
Badar, M., Sikdar, S., Nejdl, W., & Fisichella, M. (2024a). FairTrade: Achieving Pareto-Optimal Trade-Offs Between Balanced Accuracy and Fairness in Federated Learning. Proceedings of the Aaai Conference on Artificial Intelligence. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v38i10.28971
Badar, M., Sikdar, S., Nejdl, W., & Fisichella, M. (2024b). TrustFed: Navigating Trade-Offs Between Performance, Fairness, and Privacy in Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.3233/faia240762
Baji, S. S., Suryadevara, K., & Bodapati, V. (2024). Securing SDN Networks: Employing LSTM and Linear SVM Models for Enhanced Network Security With VPN Integration. Asian Journal of Convergence in Technology. https://doi.org/10.33130/ajct.2023v09i03.015
Bakhtiari, M. (2025a). Clifti-Gpt: Privacy-Preserving Federated Fine-Tuning and Transferable Inference of Foundation Models on Clinical Single-Cell Data. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-7917089/v1
Bakhtiari, M. (2025b). Clifti-Gpt: Privacy-Preserving Federated Fine-Tuning and Transferable Inference of Foundation Models on Clinical Single-Cell Data. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-7917089/v1
Balla, S. (2025). SecONNds: Secure Outsourced Neural Network Inference on ImageNet (arXiv:2506.11586). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.11586
Bandara, E. (2025). Agentsway – Software Development Methodology for AI Agents-Based Teams. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2510.23664
Barati, M., Aujla, G. S., Llanos, J. T., Adu-Duodu, K., Rana, O., Carr, M., & Ranjan, R. (2022). Privacy-Aware Cloud Auditing for GDPR Compliance Verification in Online Healthcare. Ieee Transactions on Industrial Informatics. https://doi.org/10.1109/tii.2021.3100152
Barati, M., Rana, O., Petri, I., & Theodorakopoulos, G. (2020). GDPR Compliance Verification in Internet of Things. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2020.3005509
Barman, S. (2025). Blockchain Driven Automated Traffic Violation Detection and Management System in India. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-4679800/v1
Barocas, Solon; Selbst, Andrew D. (2016). Big Data�s Disparate Impact. https://doi.org/10.15779/Z38BG31
Bates, M., & Near, J. P. (2024). DT-SIM: Property-Based Testing for MPC Security (arXiv:2403.04991). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.04991
Batista, A. S. (2025). AI in HealthTech: Building HIPAA-Compliant Solutions for Next-Generation Medical Documentation. JNGR. https://doi.org/10.70792/jngr5.0.v1i4.124
Baumgartner, M., Kreiner, K., Lauschensky, A., Jammerbund, B., Donsa, K., Hayn, D., Wiesmüller, F., Demelius, L., Modre‐Osprian, R., Neururer, S., Slamanig, G., Prantl, S., Brunelli, L., Pfeifer, B., Pölzl, G., & Schreier, G. (2024). Health Data Space Nodes for Privacy-Preserving Linkage of Medical Data to Support Collaborative Secondary Analyses. Frontiers in Medicine. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2024.1301660
Béguier, C., Andreux, M., & Tramel, E. W. (2020). Efficient Sparse Secure Aggregation for Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2007.14861
Benítez-Martínez, F. L., Hurtado, M. V., & Romero‐Frías, E. (2021). A Neural Blockchain for a Tokenizable E-Participation Model. Neurocomputing. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2020.03.116
Bhalla, P. (2025). Federated CT Foundation Models for Multi-Center Detection of Lymph Node Metastasis in Pancreatic Cancer. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-8369921/v1
Bian, G., Qu, W., & Shao, B. (2023). Blockchain-Based Trusted Federated Learning With Pre-Trained Models for COVID-19 Detection. Electronics. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics12092068
Bieniek, J., Ababio, I. B., Rahouti, M., Verma, D., & Aledhari, M. (2025). Secure and Decentralized Digital Twin Optimization: A Blockchain-Enabled Federated Learning Approach for IIoT. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.3054808
Binns, R. (2017). Fairness in Machine Learning: Lessons From Political Philosophy. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.1712.03586
Bo, W. (2025). FedMGP: Personalized Federated Learning With Multi-Group Text-Visual Prompts. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2511.00480
Bonawitz, K., Ivanov, V., Kreuter, B., Marcedone, A., McMahan, H. B., Patel, S., Ramage, D., Segal, A., & Seth, K. (2016). Practical Secure Aggregation for Federated Learning on User-Held Data (arXiv:1611.04482). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1611.04482
Bondok, A. H., Mahmoud, M., Badr, M. M., Fouda, M. M., Abdallah, M., & Alsabaan, M. (2023). Novel Evasion Attacks Against Adversarial Training Defense for Smart Grid Federated Learning. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2023.3323617
Borah, R. (2025). Robust Analog Lagrange Coded Computing: Theory and Algorithms via Discrete Fourier Transforms. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2510.20379
Boratto, L. (2020). Interplay Between Upsampling and Regularization for Provider Fairness in Recommender Systems. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2006.04279
Briouya, A., Briouya, H., Choukri, A., & Amnai, M. (2025a). Comparative Analysis of Privacy-Preserving Collaborative Learning Approaches: Security, Efficiency, and Convergence. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-6067014/v1
Briouya, A., Briouya, H., Choukri, A., & Amnai, M. (2025b). Comparative Analysis of Privacy-Preserving Collaborative Learning Approaches: Security, Efficiency, and Convergence. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-6067014/v1
Butler, D., Aspinall, D., & Gascon, A. (2018). How to Simulate It in Isabelle: Towards Formal Proof for Secure Multi-Party Computation (arXiv:1805.12482). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1805.12482
Butt, A. R., Zhang, R., & Hu, Y. (2003). A Self-Organizing Flock of Condors. https://doi.org/10.1145/1048935.1050192
Cagle, M. (2020). A Mapping Analysis of Blockchain Applications Within the Field of Auditing. Muhasebe Bilim Dünyası Dergisi. https://doi.org/10.31460/mbdd.746809
Calzavara, S., Lucchese, C., Tolomei, G., Abebe, S. A., & Orlando, S. (2020). Treant: Training Evasion-Aware Decision Trees. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10618-020-00694-9
Cammarota, R., Schunter, M., Rajan, A., Boemer, F., Kiss, Á., Treiber, A., Weinert, C., Schneider, T., Stapf, E., Sadeghi, A.-R., Demmler, D., Stock, J., Chen, H., Hussain, S. U., Riazi, S., Koushanfar, F., Gupta, S., Rosing, T. S., Chaudhuri, K., … Norton, P. (2023). Trustworthy AI Inference Systems: An Industry Research View (arXiv:2008.04449). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2008.04449
Cano, J., Cheng, M., Barkeshli, M., Clarke, D. J., & Nayak, C. (2015a). Chirality-Protected Majorana Zero Modes at the Gapless Edge of Abelian Quantum Hall States. Physical Review B, 92(19), 195152. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.92.195152
Cano, J., Cheng, M., Barkeshli, M., Clarke, D. J., & Nayak, C. (2015b). Chirality-Protected Majorana Zero Modes at the Gapless Edge of Abelian Quantum Hall States. Physical Review B, 92(19), 195152. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.92.195152
Cao, Y., Xiao, Y., Xiong, L., Bai, L., & Yoshikawa, M. (2019). PriSTE. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment. https://doi.org/10.14778/3352063.3352086
Capocasale, V., & Perboli, G. (2022). Standardizing Smart Contracts. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2022.3202550
Carrasco Ramírez, J. G. (2024). Constructing Executing and Overcoming Challenges in Distributed AI Systems: A Study of Federated Learning Framework. Jaigs. https://doi.org/10.60087/jaigs.v3i1.114
Carreira-Perpiñán, M. Á. (2017). Model Compression as Constrained Optimization, With Application to Neural Nets. Part I: General Framework. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.1707.01209
Chajewska, U., Getoor, L., Norman, J., & Shahar, Y. (2013). Utility Elicitation as a Classification Problem (arXiv:1301.7367). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1301.7367
Charbonneau, P., Corwin, E. I., Fu, L., Tsekenis, G., & Naald, M. van der. (2019). Glassy, Gardner-like Phenomenology in Minimally Polydisperse Crystalline Systems. Physical Review E, 99(2), 020901. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.99.020901
Chen, H., Chen, X., Peng, L., & Bai, Y. (2023). Personalized Fair Split Learning for Resource-Constrained Internet of Things. Sensors. https://doi.org/10.3390/s24010088
Chen, H., Zhang, Y., Krompaß, D., Gu, J., & Tresp, V. (2024). FedDAT: An Approach for Foundation Model Finetuning in Multi-Modal Heterogeneous Federated Learning. Proceedings of the Aaai Conference on Artificial Intelligence. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v38i10.29007
Chen, J. (2021). FedMatch: Federated Learning Over Heterogeneous Question Answering Data. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2108.05069
Chen, L. (2025). SP-MoE: Speculative Decoding and Prefetching for Accelerating MoE-based Model Inference. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2510.10302
Chen, S. (2024). Exploring the Potential of Federated Learning for Diffusion Model: Training and Fine-Tuning. Applied and Computational Engineering. https://doi.org/10.54254/2755-2721/52/20241136
Chen, S., & Qi, X. (2025). Entropy-Adaptive Differential Privacy Federated Learning for Student Performance Prediction and Privacy Protection: A Case Study in Python Programming. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence. https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2025.1653437
Chen, W. (2025). Security and Privacy Challenges in <scp>AI</Scp>‐Powered Library Recommender Systems: A Systematic Literature Review. Proceedings of the Association for Information Science and Technology. https://doi.org/10.1002/pra2.1412
Chen, W., Ma, G., Fan, T., Yan, K., Xu, Q., & Yang, Q. (2021). SecureBoost+: Large Scale and High-Performance Vertical Federated Gradient Boosting Decision Tree. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2110.10927
Chen, Y., Al–Rubaye, S., Tsourdos, A., Baker, L., & Gillingham, C. (2023). Differentially-Private Federated Intrusion Detection via Knowledge Distillation in Third-Party IoT Systems of Smart Airports. https://doi.org/10.1109/icc45041.2023.10279722
Chen, Z., Ji, Y. Y., Wang, B., Shi, L., Zeng, Z., & Zhang, S. (2025). Flow of Knowledge: Federated Fine-Tuning of LLMs in Healthcare Under Non-Iid Conditions. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2510.00543
Chen, Z., Sun, F., Tang, Y., Chen, H., Gao, J., & Ding, B. (2022a). Studying the Impact of Data Disclosure Mechanism in Recommender Systems via Simulation. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2204.00279
Chen, Z., Sun, F., Tang, Y., Chen, H., Gao, J., & Ding, B. (2022b). Studying the Impact of Data Disclosure Mechanism in Recommender Systems via Simulation. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2204.00279
Chen, Z., Sun, F., Tang, Y., Chen, H., Gao, J., & Ding, B. (2022c). Studying the Impact of Data Disclosure Mechanism in Recommender Systems via Simulation. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2204.00279
Chen, Z., Zheng, H., & Liu, G. (2024a). AWDP-FL: An Adaptive Differential Privacy Federated Learning Framework. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202408.1270.v1
Chen, Z., Zheng, H., & Liu, G. (2024b). AWDP-FL: An Adaptive Differential Privacy Federated Learning Framework. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202408.1270.v1
Cheng, H.-T., Koc, L., Harmsen, J., Shaked, T., Chandra, T., Aradhye, H., Anderson, G., Corrado, G., Chai, W., Ispir, M., Anil, R., Haque, Z., Hong, L., Jain, V., Liu, X., & Shah, H. (2016). Wide & Deep Learning for Recommender Systems (arXiv:1606.07792). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1606.07792
Cheng, J., Li, Q., Chen, J., & Gao, M. (2025). Efficient Vehicular Counting via Privacy-Aware Aggregation Network. Measurement Science and Technology. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6501/ada6f1
Cheng, Y. (2024). YOLO V8 Network Lightweight Method Based on Pruning and Quantization. Mmaa. https://doi.org/10.54097/4qsv1565
Cheng, Z., Ji, X., Wei, Y., Bai, Y., Chen, Y., & Qin, X. (2023a). FLPP: A Federated-Learning-Based Scheme for Privacy Protection in Mobile Edge Computing. Entropy. https://doi.org/10.3390/e25111551
Cheng, Z., Ji, X., Wei, Y., Bai, Y., Chen, Y., & Qin, X. (2023b). FLPP: A Federated-Learning-Based Scheme for Privacy Protection in Mobile Edge Computing. Entropy. https://doi.org/10.3390/e25111551
Chernikova, A., & Oprea, A. (2022). FENCE: Feasible Evasion Attacks on Neural Networks in Constrained Environments. Acm Transactions on Privacy and Security. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544746
Chinnaraju, A. (2024). Optimizing Latency and Intelligence Trade-Offs in AI-Driven Games: Edge-Cloud Architectures, Scheduling Policies, and Observability Frameworks Aravind Chinnaraju. International Journal of Advanced Research in Science Communication and Technology. https://doi.org/10.48175/ijarsct-17097
Choudhury, A., Janssen, E., Bongers, B. C., Meeteren, N. L. U. van, Dekker, A., & Soest, J. van. (2024a). Colorectal Cancer Health and Care Quality Indicators in a Federated Setting Using the Personal Health Train. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-024-02526-y
Choudhury, A., Janssen, E., Bongers, B. C., Meeteren, N. L. U. van, Dekker, A., & Soest, J. van. (2024b). Colorectal Cancer Health and Care Quality Indicators in a Federated Setting Using the Personal Health Train. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-024-02526-y
Chourasia, R., Enkhtaivan, B., Ito, K., Mori, J., Teranishi, I., & Tsuchida, H. (2022). Knowledge Cross-Distillation for Membership Privacy. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies. https://doi.org/10.2478/popets-2022-0050
Chu, L., Wang, L., Dong, Y., Pei, J., Zhou, Z., & Zhang, Y. (2021a). Training Fair Models in Federated Learning Without Data Privacy Infringement. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2109.05662
Chu, L., Wang, L., Dong, Y., Pei, J., Zhou, Z., & Zhang, Y. (2021b). Training Fair Models in Federated Learning Without Data Privacy Infringement. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2109.05662
Chuan, L., Zhai, C., Zhao, W., Qi, X., Du, R., & Hou, G. (2025). <scp>TreePPFL</Scp>: A Verifiable Secure and Efficient Federated Learning Framework. Concurrency and Computation Practice and Experience. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpe.70348
Colombo, L., Falcetta, A., & Roveri, M. (2023). TIFeD: A Tiny Integer-Based Federated Learning Algorithm With Direct Feedback Alignment. The Third International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Systems, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1145/3639856.3639867
Cong, Y., Qiu, J., Zhang, K., Fang, Z., Gao, C., Su, S., & Tian, Z. (2023). Ada‐FFL: Adaptive Computing Fairness Federated Learning. Caai Transactions on Intelligence Technology. https://doi.org/10.1049/cit2.12232
Cools, K. (2025). Vision Transformers: The Threat of Realistic Adversarial Patches. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.3070069
Corbett-Davies, S., Gaebler, J. D., Nilforoshan, H., Shroff, R., & Goel, S. (2023). The Measure and Mismeasure of Fairness (arXiv:1808.00023). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1808.00023
Culnan, M. J. (2000). Protecting Privacy Online: Is Self-Regulation Working? Journal of Public Policy & Marketing. https://doi.org/10.1509/jppm.19.1.20.16944
Dai, H., Zhu, M., & Gui, X. (2024). LSH Models in Federated Recommendation. Applied Sciences. https://doi.org/10.3390/app14114423
Dai, Z., Hsiang Low, B. K., & Jaillet, P. (2021). Differentially Private Federated Bayesian Optimization With Distributed Exploration. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2110.14153
Damle, S., Faltings, B., & Gujar, S. (2019). A Practical Solution to Yao’s Millionaires’ Problem and Its Application in Designing Secure Combinatorial Auction (Version 1). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1906.06567
Datta, A., Tschantz, M. C., & Datta, A. (2015a). Automated Experiments on Ad Privacy Settings: A Tale of Opacity, Choice, and Discrimination (arXiv:1408.6491). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1408.6491
Datta, A., Tschantz, M. C., & Datta, A. (2015b). Automated Experiments on Ad Privacy Settings: A Tale of Opacity, Choice, and Discrimination (arXiv:1408.6491). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1408.6491
Deng, Y., Guo, B., & Chen, S. (2025). Privacy-Preserving Approach to Edge Federated Learning Based on Blockchain and Fully Homomorphic Encryption. Electronics, 14(2), 361. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics14020361
Deng, Z. (2022). Understanding Real-World Threats to Deep Learning Models in Android Apps. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2209.09577
Desai, N., & Verma, D. (2019). Properties of Federated Averaging on Highly Distributed Data. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2518941
Dhanawat, V., Shinde, V., Karande, V., & Singhal, K. (2025). Enhancing Financial Risk Management With Federated AI. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202411.2087.v2
Dhaouadi, S., Ben Khelifa, M. M., Balti, A., & Duché, P. (2025). Optical Sensor-Based Approaches in Obesity Detection: A Literature Review of Gait Analysis, Pose Estimation, and Human Voxel Modeling. Sensors. https://doi.org/10.3390/s25154612
Ding, J., Zhang, X., Li, X., Wang, J., Yu, R., & Pan, M. (2020). Differentially Private and Fair Classification via Calibrated Functional Mechanism. Proceedings of the Aaai Conference on Artificial Intelligence. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v34i01.5402
Ding, M., Li, P., Li, S., & Zhang, H. (2021). HFContractFuzzer: Fuzzing Hyperledger Fabric Smart Contracts for Vulnerability Detection. https://doi.org/10.1145/3463274.3463351
Ding, Y., Sun, Y., & Feng, J. (2024). The Application of Causal Inference Algorithms in Federated Recommender Systems. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2023.3342861
Dipika Birari, E. al. (2024). Towards a Holistic Approach to Chronic Disease Management: Integrating Federated Learning and IoT for Personalized Health Care. Jes. https://doi.org/10.52783/jes.647
Divya, R. (2025). Privacy—Preserving Anomaly Detection Using Federated Learning and Explainable AI. International Journal for Research in Applied Science and Engineering Technology. https://doi.org/10.22214/ijraset.2025.66970
Domingo‐Ferrer, J., Blanco-Justicia, A., Manjón, J., & Sánchez, D. (2021). Secure and Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning via Co-Utility. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2108.01913
Dong, Z., Liu, W., Liu, S., & Chen, X. (2023). Addressing Class Variable Imbalance in Federated Semi-Supervised Learning. Computer Science, Engineering and Applications, 257–272. https://doi.org/10.5121/csit.2023.130522
Du, W., Xu, D., Wu, X., & Tong, H. (2020). Fairness-Aware Agnostic Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2010.05057
Duan, J., & Xu, K. (n.d.). Know When to Trust. https://doi.org/10.17918/00011095
Dwork, C. (2006). Differential Privacy. In M. Bugliesi, B. Preneel, V. Sassone, & I. Wegener (Eds.), Automata, Languages and Programming (Vol. 4052, pp. 1–12). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/11787006_1
Dziubiński, M., Goyal, S., & Vigier, A. (2016). Conflict and Networks. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199948277.013.13
Fan, F. X., Tan, C., Ong, Y.-S., Wattenhofer, R., & Ooi, W. T. (2025). FedRLHF: A Convergence-Guaranteed Federated Framework for Privacy-Preserving and Personalized RLHF. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-6538432/v1
Fan, H., Huang, C., & Liu, Y. (2023). Federated Learning-Based Privacy-Preserving Data Aggregation Scheme for IIoT. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2022.3226245
Fares, M., & Sertbaş, A. (2024). A Differentially Private Federated Learning Application in Privacy-Preserving Medical Imaging. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-3873379/v1
Farokhi, F. (2024). Barycentric and Pairwise Rényi Quantum Leakage With Application to Privacy-Utility Trade-Off. Proceedings of the Royal Society a Mathematical Physical and Engineering Sciences. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2024.0319
Farzana, W., Witherow, M. A., Longoria, I., Sadique, S., Temtam, A., & Iftekharuddin, K. M. (2024). Domain Adaptive Federated Learning for Multi-Institution Molecular Mutation Prediction and Bias Identification. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.3008748
Feigenbaum, J., Jaggard, A. D., & Schapira, M. (2009). Approximate Privacy: Foundations and Quantification (Version 2). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.0910.5714
Feng, S., Ren, X., Li, K., & Sun, X. (2022). Hierarchical Inductive Transfer for Continual Dialogue Learning. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.findings-acl.57
Feretzakis, G., Papaspyridis, K., Gkoulalas-Divanis, A., & Verykios, V. S. (2024a). Privacy-Preserving Techniques in Generative AI and Large Language Models: A Narrative Review. Information. https://doi.org/10.3390/info15110697
Feretzakis, G., Papaspyridis, K., Gkoulalas-Divanis, A., & Verykios, V. S. (2024b). Privacy-Preserving Techniques in Generative AI and Large Language Models: A Narrative Review. Information. https://doi.org/10.3390/info15110697
Fioretto, F., Hentenryck, P. V., & Ziani, J. (2024). Differential Privacy Overview and Fundamental Techniques (arXiv:2411.04710). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2411.04710
Firdaus, M., Larasati, H. T., & Rhee, K.-H. (2023). A Blockchain-Assisted Distributed Edge Intelligence for Privacy-Preserving Vehicular Networks. Computers Materials & Continua. https://doi.org/10.32604/cmc.2023.039487
Fowl, L., Geiping, J., Czaja, W., Goldblum, M., & Goldstein, T. (2021). Robbing the Fed: Directly Obtaining Private Data in Federated Learning With Modified Models. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2110.13057
Fredrikson, M., Jha, S., & Ristenpart, T. (2015). Model Inversion Attacks that Exploit Confidence Information and Basic Countermeasures. Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 1322–1333. https://doi.org/10.1145/2810103.2813677
Fu, X., & Wang, J. (2009). P2p-Based VoIP QoS Management in Heterogeneous Networks. https://doi.org/10.1109/wicom.2009.5304178
Ganji, A., Usha, D., & Rajakumar, P. S. (2025). Hybrid Machine Learning Framework With Data Analytics Model for Privacy-Preserved Intelligent Predictive Maintenance in Healthcare IoT. Journal of Computer Science. https://doi.org/10.3844/jcssp.2025.1.12
Gao, H., Xu, H., Zhang, L., & Zhou, X. (2019). A Differential Game Model for Data Utility and Privacy-Preserving in Mobile Crowdsensing. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2019.2940096
García-Álvarez, L., Felicetti, S., Rico, E., Solano, E., & Sabín, C. (2017). Entanglement of superconducting qubits via acceleration radiation. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 657. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-00770-z
Garg, G., Prabha, C., & Ahuja, B. (2024). Explainable AI, Federated Learning, and AI Ethics in E-Commerce. https://doi.org/10.4018/979-8-3693-5718-7.ch013
Geiping, J., Bauermeister, H., Dröge, H., & Moeller, M. (2020a). Inverting Gradients—How easy is it to break privacy in federated learning? (arXiv:2003.14053). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2003.14053
Geiping, J., Bauermeister, H., Dröge, H., & Moeller, M. (2020b). Inverting Gradients—How easy is it to break privacy in federated learning? (arXiv:2003.14053). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2003.14053
Geng, D., Wang, S., & Zhang, Y. (2024a). Multi‐Objective Federated Averaging Algorithm. Expert Systems. https://doi.org/10.1111/exsy.13761
Geng, D., Wang, S., & Zhang, Y. (2024b). Multi‐Objective Federated Averaging Algorithm. Expert Systems. https://doi.org/10.1111/exsy.13761
Geyer, R. C., Klein, T., & Nabi, M. (2018a). Differentially Private Federated Learning: A Client Level Perspective (arXiv:1712.07557). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1712.07557
Geyer, R. C., Klein, T., & Nabi, M. (2018b). Differentially Private Federated Learning: A Client Level Perspective (arXiv:1712.07557). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1712.07557
Geyer, R. C., Klein, T., & Nabi, M. (2018c). Differentially Private Federated Learning: A Client Level Perspective (arXiv:1712.07557). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1712.07557
Giri, K., Dadheech, P., & Gupta, M. K. (2024). Improving Intrusion Detection Systems’ Resilience to Adversarial Attacks Through Feature Engineering and Hybrid Metaheuristic Algorithms. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-5350806/v1
Gomez-Uribe, C. A., & Hunt, N. (2016). The Netflix Recommender System: Algorithms, Business Value, and Innovation. ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems, 6(4), 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1145/2843948
Goodfellow, I. J., Shlens, J., & Szegedy, C. (2015a). Explaining and Harnessing Adversarial Examples (arXiv:1412.6572). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1412.6572
Goodfellow, I. J., Shlens, J., & Szegedy, C. (2015b). Explaining and Harnessing Adversarial Examples (arXiv:1412.6572). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1412.6572
Graham, O., & Hamilton, D. K. (2025). Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning for Electronic Health Records. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202506.1137.v1
Guo, C., Hannun, A., Knott, B., van der Maaten, L., Tygert, M., & Zhu, R. (2020). Secure multiparty computations in floating-point arithmetic. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2001.03192
Guo, D., & Choo, K. R. (2025). Applications of Federated Large Language Model for Adverse Drug Reactions Prediction: Scoping Review. Journal of Medical Internet Research. https://doi.org/10.2196/68291
Guo, Z., Dong, R., & Liu, A. (2024). Personalized Differential Privacy Approach in the Federated Learning Scenario. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.3024652
Gupta, A. K., Chandra, G. V., Das, N., & Paul, G. (2024). An Efficient and Secure Quantum Blind Signature‐based Electronic Cash Transaction Scheme. Iet Quantum Communication. https://doi.org/10.1049/qtc2.12109
Gupta, A., Neeri, & Manmohan. (2019). Transfer Learning in Sales Prediction: Leveraging Pre-Trained Models for Improved Generalization. The Pharma Innovation. https://doi.org/10.22271/tpi.2019.v8.i5sa.25261
Ha, J., Azzaoui, A. E., & Park, J. H. (2025). FL-TENB4: A Federated-Learning-Enhanced Tiny EfficientNetB4-Lite Approach for Deepfake Detection in CCTV Environments. Sensors. https://doi.org/10.3390/s25030788
Haagh, H., Karbyshev, A., Oechsner, S., Spitters, B., & Strub, P.-Y. (2018). Computer-aided proofs for multiparty computation with active security. 2018 IEEE 31st Computer Security Foundations Symposium (CSF), 119–131. https://doi.org/10.1109/CSF.2018.00016
Haddadpour, F., Karimi, B., Li, P., & Li, X. (2020). FedSKETCH: Communication-Efficient and Private Federated Learning via Sketching. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2008.04975
Hafeez, K., Rehmani, M. H., & O’Shea, D. (2021). DPNCT: A Differential Private Noise Cancellation Scheme for Load Monitoring and Billing for Smart Meters. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2102.09458
Hai, T., Zhou, J., Srividhya, S., Jain, S., Young, P., & Agrawal, S. (2022). BVFLEMR: An Integrated Federated Learning and Blockchain Technology for Cloud-Based Medical Records Recommendation System. Journal of Cloud Computing Advances Systems and Applications. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13677-022-00294-6
Halko, N., Martinsson, P.-G., & Tropp, J. A. (2010). Finding structure with randomness: Probabilistic algorithms for constructing approximate matrix decompositions (arXiv:0909.4061). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.0909.4061
Han, S., Ding, H., Zhao, S., Ren, S., Wang, Z., Lin, J., & Zhou, S. (2024). Practical and Robust Federated Learning With Highly Scalable Regression Training. Ieee Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems. https://doi.org/10.1109/tnnls.2023.3271859
Han, S., Mao, H., & Dally, W. J. (2015). Deep Compression: Compressing Deep Neural Networks With Pruning, Trained Quantization and Huffman Coding. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.1510.00149
Han, Y. (2024). Research on Machine Learning Technology With Privacy Protection Strategy in Recommendation Field. Applied and Computational Engineering. https://doi.org/10.54254/2755-2721/43/20230848
Harasic, M., Keese, F.-S., Mattern, D., & Paschke, A. (2023). Recent Advances and Future Challenges in Federated Recommender Systems. International Journal of Data Science and Analytics. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41060-023-00442-4
Hardt, M., Price, E., & Srebro, N. (2016). Equality of Opportunity in Supervised Learning (arXiv:1610.02413). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1610.02413
Hartmann, M., Danoy, G., & Bouvry, P. (2025). FedPref: Federated Learning Across Heterogeneous Multi-Objective Preferences. Acm Transactions on Modeling and Performance Evaluation of Computing Systems. https://doi.org/10.1145/3708984
Hasan, B. T. (2025). Lightweight Deep Learning for IoT-Based Medical Diagnosis: A Survey. Mesopotamian Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare. https://doi.org/10.58496/mjaih/2025/023
Hasan, N., Rasel, I. H., Rahman, M. A., Islam, M. K., Arman, M., & Jahan, N. (2022). Securing U.S. Healthcare Infrastructure With Machine Learning: Protecting Patient Data as a National Security Priority. International Journal of Computational and Experimental Science and Engineering. https://doi.org/10.22399/ijcesen.3987
He, H., & He, Z. (2023). Minimum Gaussian Noise Variance of Federated Learning in the Presence of Mutual Information Based Differential Privacy. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2023.3323020
He, X., Liao, L., Zhang, H., Nie, L., Hu, X., & Chua, T.-S. (2017). Neural Collaborative Filtering (arXiv:1708.05031). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1708.05031
Hee, K. E., Maros, M. E., Siegel, F., & Ganslandt, T. (2022). Rapid Convolutional Neural Networks for Gram-Stained Image Classification at Inference Time on Mobile Devices: Empirical Study From Transfer Learning to Optimization. Biomedicines. https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines10112808
Heryanto, Y. D., Zhang, Y., & Imoto, S. (2024). Tissue-Specific Cell Type Annotation With Supervised Representation Learning Using Split Vector Quantization and Its Comparisons With Single-Cell Foundation Models. https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.09.627458
Herzog, D. J., & Herzog, N. J. (2024). Blockchain Technology and Sanitary Aspects of the Water Supply. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202403.1620.v1
Hill, M. A. (2009a). Ext and the Motivic Steenrod Algebra over $\R$ (arXiv:0904.1998). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.0904.1998
Hill, M. A. (2009b). Ext and the Motivic Steenrod Algebra over $\R$ (arXiv:0904.1998). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.0904.1998
Hosseinalipour, S., Brinton, C. G., Aggarwal, V., Dai, H., & Chiang, M. (2020). From Federated to Fog Learning: Distributed Machine Learning Over Heterogeneous Wireless Networks. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2006.03594
Hosseini, S. M., Sikaroudi, M., Babaie, M., & Tizhoosh, H. R. (2023a). Proportionally Fair Hospital Collaborations in Federated Learning of Histopathology Images. Ieee Transactions on Medical Imaging. https://doi.org/10.1109/tmi.2023.3234450
Hosseini, S. M., Sikaroudi, M., Babaie, M., & Tizhoosh, H. R. (2023b). Proportionally Fair Hospital Collaborations in Federated Learning of Histopathology Images. Ieee Transactions on Medical Imaging. https://doi.org/10.1109/tmi.2023.3234450
Hostler, R. E., Yoon, V. Y., Guo, Z., Guimaraes, T., & Forgionne, G. (2011). Assessing the impact of recommender agents on on-line consumer unplanned purchase behavior. Information & Management, 48(8), 336–343. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2011.08.002
Hou, C., Zhan, H., Shrivastava, A., Wang, S., Livshits, S., Fanti, G., & Lazar, D. A. (2023). Privately Customizing Prefinetuning to Better Match User Data in Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2302.09042
Hu, H., Dobbie, G., Salčić, Z., Liu, M., Zhang, J., Lyu, L., & Zhang, X. (2021). Differentially Private Locality Sensitive Hashing Based Federated Recommender System. Concurrency and Computation Practice and Experience. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpe.6233
Hu, Q., & Song, Y. (2024a). User Consented Federated Recommender System Against Personalized Attribute Inference Attack. Proceedings of the 17th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 276–285. https://doi.org/10.1145/3616855.3635830
Hu, Q., & Song, Y. (2024b). User Consented Federated Recommender System Against Personalized Attribute Inference Attack. https://doi.org/10.1145/3616855.3635830
Hu, Q., & Song, Y. (2024c). User Consented Federated Recommender System Against Personalized Attribute Inference Attack. https://doi.org/10.1145/3616855.3635830
Hu, Y., Liang, W., Wu, R., Xiao, K., Wang, W., Li, X., Liu, J., & Qin, Z. (2023). Quantifying and Defending Against Privacy Threats on Federated Knowledge Graph Embedding. https://doi.org/10.1145/3543507.3583450
Hu, Y., Xia, W., Xiao, J., & Wu, C. (2020). GFL: A Decentralized Federated Learning Framework Based on Blockchain. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2010.10996
Huang, Q. (2025). Med-Ssfwt: A Self-Supervised Federated Weight Transfer Framework for Medical Model Fusion. https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.08.25340199
Huang, Z., Yu, L., Herbozo Contreras, L. F., Eshraghian, K., Truong, N. D., Nikpour, A., & Kavehei, O. (2025). Advancing Privacy-Aware Machine Learning on Sensitive Data via Edge-Based Continual Μ-Training for Personalized Large Models. Machine Learning Science and Technology. https://doi.org/10.1088/2632-2153/adaca3
Hussien, N. M., Salman, S. A., & Aljanabi, M. (2023a). Secure Federated Learning With a Homomorphic Encryption Model. International Journal Papier Advance and Scientific Review, 4(3), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.47667/ijpasr.v4i3.235
Hussien, N. M., Salman, S. A., & Aljanabi, M. (2023b). Secure Federated Learning With a Homomorphic Encryption Model. International Journal Papier Advance and Scientific Review. https://doi.org/10.47667/ijpasr.v4i3.235
Iyengar, S. S., & Lepper, M. R. (2000). When choice is demotivating: Can one desire too much of a good thing? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(6), 995–1006. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.79.6.995
Jannach, D., & Jugovac, M. (2019). Measuring the Business Value of Recommender Systems. ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems, 10(4), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1145/3370082
Jarin, I., & Eshete, B. (2023). MIAShield: Defending Membership Inference Attacks via Preemptive Exclusion of Members. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies. https://doi.org/10.56553/popets-2023-0024
Javed, L., Anjum, A., Yakubu, B. M., Iqbal, M., Moqurrab, S. A., & Srivastava, G. (2022). <scp>ShareChain</Scp>: Blockchain‐enabled Model for Sharing Patient Data Using Federated Learning and Differential Privacy. Expert Systems. https://doi.org/10.1111/exsy.13131
Jayaraman, B., & Evans, D. (2019). Evaluating Differentially Private Machine Learning in Practice. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.1902.08874
Jiang, H. (2019). SMART: Robust and Efficient Fine-Tuning for Pre-Trained Natural Language Models Through Principled Regularized Optimization. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.1911.03437
Jiang, J., & Chen, J. (2021). Framework of Blockchain-Supported E-Commerce Platform for Small and Medium Enterprises. Sustainability. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13158158
Jiang, S., Firouzi, F., & Chakrabarty, K. (2022). Low-Overhead Clustered Federated Learning for Personalized Stress Monitoring. https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.21072796.v1
Jiang, Z., Xu, Y., Xu, H., Wang, Z., Qiao, C., & Zhao, Y. (2022). FedMP: Federated Learning Through Adaptive Model Pruning in Heterogeneous Edge Computing. https://doi.org/10.1109/icde53745.2022.00062
Jimenez-Gutierrez, D. M. (2025). Federated Learning for Pediatric Pneumonia Detection: Enabling Collaborative Diagnosis Without Sharing Patient Data. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2511.11714
Jin, R., He, X., & Dai, H. (2022). Communication Efficient Federated Learning With Energy Awareness Over Wireless Networks. Ieee Transactions on Wireless Communications. https://doi.org/10.1109/twc.2021.3138394
Jing, Z., & Wang, R. (2024). Construction of a Deep Learning Model for Unmanned Aerial Vehicle-Assisted Safe Lightweight Industrial Quality Inspection in Complex Environments. Drones. https://doi.org/10.3390/drones8120707
Jo, Y., & Park, C. (2019). BlockLot: Blockchain Based Verifiable Lottery. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.1912.00642
Jonker, S. L., Lejbølle Jelstrup, M. A., Meng, W., & Lampe, B. (2024). Detecting Post Editing of Multimedia Images Using Transfer Learning and Fine Tuning. Acm Transactions on Multimedia Computing Communications and Applications. https://doi.org/10.1145/3633284
Ju, L., Zhang, T., Toor, S., & Hellander, A. (2023a). Accelerating Fair Federated Learning: Adaptive Federated Adam. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2301.09357
Ju, L., Zhang, T., Toor, S., & Hellander, A. (2023b). Accelerating Fair Federated Learning: Adaptive Federated Adam. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2301.09357
Ju, L., Zhang, T., Toor, S., & Hellander, A. (2023c). Accelerating Fair Federated Learning: Adaptive Federated Adam. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2301.09357
Kairouz, P., & McMahan, H. B. (2021). Advances and Open Problems in Federated Learning. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 14(1–2), 1–210. https://doi.org/10.1561/2200000083
Kairouz, P., McMahan, H. B., Avent, B., Bellet, A., Bennis, M., Bhagoji, A. N., Bonawitz, K., Charles, Z., Cormode, G., Cummings, R., D’Oliveira, R. G. L., Eichner, H., Rouayheb, S. E., Evans, D., Gardner, J., Garrett, Z., Gascón, A., Ghazi, B., Gibbons, P. B., … Zhao, S. (2021a). Advances and Open Problems in Federated Learning (arXiv:1912.04977). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1912.04977
Kairouz, P., McMahan, H. B., Avent, B., Bellet, A., Bennis, M., Bhagoji, A. N., Bonawitz, K., Charles, Z., Cormode, G., Cummings, R., D’Oliveira, R. G. L., Eichner, H., Rouayheb, S. E., Evans, D., Gardner, J., Garrett, Z., Gascón, A., Ghazi, B., Gibbons, P. B., … Zhao, S. (2021b). Advances and Open Problems in Federated Learning (arXiv:1912.04977). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1912.04977
Kairouz, P., McMahan, H. B., Avent, B., Bellet, A., Bennis, M., Bhagoji, A. N., Bonawitz, K., Charles, Z., Cormode, G., Cummings, R., D’Oliveira, R. G. L., Eichner, H., Rouayheb, S. E., Evans, D., Gardner, J., Garrett, Z., Gascón, A., Ghazi, B., Gibbons, P. B., … Zhao, S. (2021c). Advances and Open Problems in Federated Learning (arXiv:1912.04977). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1912.04977
Kairouz, P., McMahan, H. B., Avent, B., Bellet, A., Bennis, M., Bhagoji, A. N., Bonawitz, K., Charles, Z., Cormode, G., Cummings, R., D’Oliveira, R. G. L., Eichner, H., Rouayheb, S. E., Evans, D., Gardner, J., Garrett, Z., Gascón, A., Ghazi, B., Gibbons, P. B., … Zhao, S. (2021d). Advances and Open Problems in Federated Learning (arXiv:1912.04977). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1912.04977
Kairouz, P., McMahan, H. B., Avent, B., Bellet, A., Bennis, M., Bhagoji, A. N., Bonawitz, K., Charles, Z., Cormode, G., Cummings, R., D’Oliveira, R. G. L., Eichner, H., Rouayheb, S. E., Evans, D., Gardner, J., Garrett, Z., Gascón, A., Ghazi, B., Gibbons, P. B., … Zhao, S. (2021e). Advances and Open Problems in Federated Learning (arXiv:1912.04977). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1912.04977
Kairouz, P., McMahan, H. B., Avent, B., Bellet, A., Bennis, M., Bhagoji, A. N., Bonawitz, K., Charles, Z., Cormode, G., Cummings, R., D’Oliveira, R. G. L., Eichner, H., Rouayheb, S. E., Evans, D., Gardner, J., Garrett, Z., Gascón, A., Ghazi, B., Gibbons, P. B., … Zhao, S. (2021f). Advances and Open Problems in Federated Learning (arXiv:1912.04977). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1912.04977
Kalejaiye, A. N., Shallom, K., & Chukwuani, E. N. (2025). Implementing Federated Learning With Privacy-Preserving Encryption to Secure Patient-Derived Imaging and Sequencing Data From Cyber Intrusions. International Journal of Science and Research Archive. https://doi.org/10.30574/ijsra.2025.16.1.2120
Kalluri, K. (2024). ADAPTING LLMs FOR LOW RESOURCE LANGUAGES-TECHNIQUES AND ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS. Interantional Journal of Scientific Research in Engineering and Management. https://doi.org/10.55041/isjem00140
Kansal, I., Khuallar, V., Gupta, G., Gupta, D., Juneja, S., Nauman, A., & Muhammad, G. (2025). Deep Learning‐Based Privacy Preserving Multimodal Biometrics Recognition for Cross‐Silo Datasets. Expert Systems. https://doi.org/10.1111/exsy.70053
Karami, M. (2025). MedFedPure: A Medical Federated Framework With MAE-based Detection and Diffusion Purification for Inference-Time Attacks. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2511.11625
Keerthana, R., Savitha, S., Logeswaran, K., Rajivkannan, A., & Namasivayam, M. (2025). AI Technologies for Predicting Susceptibility and Outcomes of Immunological Disorders. https://doi.org/10.4018/979-8-3693-9725-1.ch004
Kejriwal, D., Goel, A., Pujari, T. D., & Pakina, A. K. (2023). Adversarial AI in Federated Learning: Threats, Robust Defenses, and the Role of Explain Ability for Trustworthy Distributed AI. Iosr Journal of Computer Engineering. https://doi.org/10.9790/0661-2506033243
Kejriwal, D., Pujari, T., & Goel, A. (2023). Adversarial AI in Federated Learning: Threats, Robust Defenses, and the Role of Explainability for Trustworthy Distributed AI. International Journal Science and Technology. https://doi.org/10.56127/ijst.v2i3.1960
Khan, A. N., Rizwan, A., Ahmad, R., Jin, W., Khan, Q. W., Lim, S., & Kim, D. (2024). Hetero-FedIoT: A Rule-Based Interworking Architecture for Heterogeneous Federated IoT Networks. Ieee Internet of Things Journal. https://doi.org/10.1109/jiot.2023.3308579
Khan, L. U., Saad, W., Han, Z., Hossain, E., & Hong, C. S. (2020). Federated Learning for Internet of Things: Recent Advances, Taxonomy, and Open Challenges. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2009.13012
Khan, M. J., Rath, S., & Zaib, M. H. (2024). Privacy-Enhanced Image Restoration in Remote Sensing via Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.24679386.v3
Khan, Z. (2025). Wearable Biosensors and AI for Real-Time Health Monitoring. Academia Tech Frontiers Journal. https://doi.org/10.63056/atfj.1.1.2025.364
Khanna, A., Schaffer, V., Gürsoy, G., & Gerstein, M. (2022). Privacy-Preserving Model Training for Disease Prediction Using Federated Learning With Differential Privacy. https://doi.org/10.1109/embc48229.2022.9871742
Khayari, M., Schneider, S., Kramer, I., Romary, L., & Collaboration,  the termsciences. (2006a). Unification of multi-lingual scientific terminological resources using the ISO 16642 standard. The TermSciences initiative (Version 1). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.CS/0604027
Khayari, M., Schneider, S., Kramer, I., Romary, L., & Collaboration,  the termsciences. (2006b). Unification of multi-lingual scientific terminological resources using the ISO 16642 standard. The TermSciences initiative (arXiv:cs/0604027). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.cs/0604027
Khayari, M., Schneider, S., Kramer, I., Romary, L., & Collaboration,  the termsciences. (2006c). Unification of multi-lingual scientific terminological resources using the ISO 16642 standard. The TermSciences initiative (arXiv:cs/0604027). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.cs/0604027
Kim, D., Woo, H., & Lee, Y. H. (2024a). Addressing Bias and Fairness Using Fair Federated Learning: A Systematic Literature Review. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202410.1060.v1
Kim, D., Woo, H., & Lee, Y. H. (2024b). Addressing Bias and Fairness Using Fair Federated Learning: A Systematic Literature Review. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202410.1060.v1
Kim, D., Woo, H., & Lee, Y. H. (2024c). Addressing Bias and Fairness Using Fair Federated Learning: A Systematic Literature Review. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202410.1060.v1
Kim, D., Woo, H., & Lee, Y. H. (2024d). Addressing Bias and Fairness Using Fair Federated Learning: A Systematic Literature Review. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202410.1060.v1
Koike, S., Tanaka, H., & Maeda, M. (2024). Federated Learning-Based Ransomware Detection via Indicators of Compromise. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-4585988/v1
Komalasari, R. (2024). Secure and Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning With Explainable Artificial Intelligence for Smart Healthcare Systems. https://doi.org/10.4018/979-8-3693-1874-4.ch018
Kotegawa, H., Masaki, S., Awai, Y., Tou, H., Mizuguchi, Y., & Takano, Y. (2008). Evidence for Unconventional Superconductivity in Arsenic-Free Iron-Based Superconductor FeSe: A ^77Se-NMR Study. Journal of the Physical Society of Japan, 77(11), 113703. https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.77.113703
Kryssanov, V. V., Rinaldo, F. J., Ogawa, H., & Kuleshov, E. (2006). Citation as a Representation Process (arXiv:cs/0607070). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.cs/0607070
Kserawi, F., Al-Marri, S. M., & Malluhi, Q. (2022). Privacy-Preserving Fog Aggregation of Smart Grid Data Using Dynamic Differentially-Private Data Perturbation. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2022.3167015
Kshirod Sarmah, N. (2025). Detection of Heart Disease Using Deep Federated Learning Algorithms. Journal of Information Systems Engineering and Management, 10(25s), 399–408. https://doi.org/10.52783/jisem.v10i25s.4035
Kucharavy, A. (2024). Adapting LLMs to Downstream Applications. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-54827-7_2
Kumar, A., Finley, B., Braud, T., Tarkoma, S., & Hui, P. (2020). Marketplace for AI Models. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2003.01593
Kumar, A., & Srirama, S. N. (2021). Fog Enabled Distributed Training Architecture for Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93620-4_7
Kvochko, A., Maltsev, E., Балышев, А. В., Malakhov, S., & Efimov, A. (2024). Off-Chip Memory Allocation for Neural Processing Units. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2024.3352900
Lam, M., Wei, G.-Y., Brooks, D., Reddi, V. J., & Mitzenmacher, M. (2021). Gradient Disaggregation: Breaking Privacy in Federated Learning by Reconstructing the User Participant Matrix. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2106.06089
Lebrun, T., Boutet, A., Aalmoes, J., & Baud, A. (2022). MixNN. 135–147. https://doi.org/10.1145/3528535.3565240
Lee, H. H., & Gargroetzi, E. (2023). “It’s Like a Double-Edged Sword”: Mentor Perspectives on Ethics and Responsibility in a Learning Analytics–Supported Virtual Mentoring Program. Journal of Learning Analytics. https://doi.org/10.18608/jla.2023.7787
Leelavathi, C. (2025). Federated Learning and Explainable AI: A Transparent and Secure Approach to Fraud Detection. PST. https://doi.org/10.52783/pst.1645
Lencses, M., & Takacs, G. (2014). Excited state TBA and renormalized TCSA in the scaling Potts model. Journal of High Energy Physics, 2014(9), 52. https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP09(2014)052
li,  xiaohai, Chen, Y., Zhang, Y., & Yang, X. (2024). An Adaptive Quantization Model Compression Method for Heterogeneous Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-3825246/v1
Li, H., Chen, L., Ding, H., Li, Q., Sun, B., & Wu, G. (2019). Procedural Learning With Robust Visual Features via Low Rank Prior. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2019.2894841
Li, H., & Han, T. (2019). An End-to-End Encrypted Neural Network for Gradient Updates Transmission in Federated Learning. 589–589. https://doi.org/10.1109/dcc.2019.00101
Li, J., & Wu, Q. (2024). Fast-Cflb: A Privacy-Preserving Data Sharing System for Internet of Vehicles Using Ternary Federated Learning and Blockchain. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-4412111/v1
Li, L., Zhu, L., & Li, W. (2025a). Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning for Space–Air–Ground Integrated Networks: A Bi-Level Reinforcement Learning and Adaptive Transfer Learning Optimization Framework. Sensors. https://doi.org/10.3390/s25092828
Li, L., Zhu, L., & Li, W. (2025b). Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning for Space–Air–Ground Integrated Networks: A Bi-Level Reinforcement Learning and Adaptive Transfer Learning Optimization Framework. Sensors. https://doi.org/10.3390/s25092828
Li, Q., Zhou, Q., Li, M., & Wang, Z. (2023). Trustworthy Anti-Collusion Federated Learning Scheme Optimized by Game Theory. Electronics. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics12183867
Li, R., Shu, Y., Cao, Y., Luo, Y., Zuo, Q., Wu, X., Yu, J., & Zhang, W. (2024a). Federated Cross-View E-Commerce Recommendation Based on Feature Rescaling. Scientific Reports, 14(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-81278-1
Li, R., Shu, Y., Cao, Y., Luo, Y., Zuo, Q., Wu, X., Yu, J., & Zhang, W. (2024b). Federated Cross-View E-Commerce Recommendation Based on Feature Rescaling. Scientific Reports. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-81278-1
Li, R., Shu, Y., Cao, Y., Luo, Y., Zuo, Q., Wu, X., Yu, J., & Zhang, W. (2024c). Federated Cross-View E-Commerce Recommendation Based on Feature Rescaling. Scientific Reports. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-81278-1
Li, S., & Lo, K.-T. (2007). Security Problems with Improper Implementations of Improved FEA-M. Journal of Systems and Software, 80(5), 791–794. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2006.05.002
Li, T. (2019). Federated Learning: Challenges, Methods, and Future Directions. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.1908.07873
Li, T., Sahu, A. K., Talwalkar, A., & Smith, V. (2020). Federated Learning: Challenges, Methods, and Future Directions. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 37(3), 50–60. https://doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2020.2975749
Li, T., Song, L., & Fragouli, C. (2020). Federated Recommendation System via Differential Privacy. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2005.06670
Li, W., Hacker, C. A., Liang, Y., Richter, C. A., Gundlach, D. J., Liang, X., & Peng, L. (2013). Highly reproducible metal/graphene contacts and stable electrical performance by UV-Ozone treatment (arXiv:1303.1353). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1303.1353
LI, X., Fang, Z., & SHI, Z. (2022). MpFedcon: Model-Contrastive Personalized Federated Learning With the Class Center. Wuhan University Journal of Natural Sciences, 27(6), 508–520. https://doi.org/10.1051/wujns/2022276508
Li, X., Grandvalet, Y., & Davoine, F. (2018). Explicit Inductive Bias for Transfer Learning With Convolutional Networks. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.1802.01483
Li, X., Grandvalet, Y., Davoine, F., Cheng, J., Cui, Y., Zhang, H., Belongie, S., Tsai, Y.-H., & Yang, M. (2020). Transfer Learning in Computer Vision Tasks: Remember Where You Come from. Image and Vision Computing. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imavis.2019.103853
Li, Y. (2025). GuardFed: A Trustworthy Federated Learning Framework Against Dual-Facet Attacks. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2511.09294
Li, Y., Khandekar, N., Wang, S., Khanna, V. V., Sanker, J., & Gerstein, M. (2025). NoisyFlow: Differentially Private Optimal Transport Using Neural Networks for Secure Biomedical Data Sharing. https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.01.31.635830
Li, Z., Long, G., Jiang, J., Zhang, C., & Yang, Q. (2025). Federated Vision-Language-Recommendation with Personalized Fusion (arXiv:2410.08478). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2410.08478
Li, Z., Long, G., & Zhou, T. (2023a). Federated Recommendation With Additive Personalization. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2301.09109
Li, Z., Long, G., & Zhou, T. (2023b). Federated Recommendation With Additive Personalization. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2301.09109
Li, Z., Lu, J., Luo, S., Zhu, D., Shao, Y., Li, Y., Zhang, Z., & Wu, C. (2022). Towards Effective Clustered Federated Learning: A Peer-to-Peer Framework With Adaptive Neighbor Matching. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2203.12285
Lian, Y., Jiang, X., & Long, Q. (2025). D3MI: An Efficient and Powerful Federated Imputation Method for Bias Reduction in the Analysis of Distributed Incomplete Data by Accounting for Within-Site Correlation and Between-Site Heterogeneity. https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.08.25327224
Lian, Z., Wang, W., Huang, H., & Su, C. (2022). Layer-Based Communication-Efficient Federated Learning With Privacy Preservation. Ieice Transactions on Information and Systems. https://doi.org/10.1587/transinf.2021bcp0006
Liang, M. (2025). Ethical AI in Medical Text Generation: Balancing Innovation With Privacy in Public Health. Frontiers in Public Health. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2025.1583507
Liang, X., Zhao, J., Chen, Y., Bandara, E., & Shetty, S. (2023). Architectural Design of a Blockchain-Enabled, Federated Learning Platform for Algorithmic Fairness in Predictive Health Care: Design Science Study. Journal of Medical Internet Research. https://doi.org/10.2196/46547
Liang, Z., & Chen, Y. (2025a). Optimizing Differential Privacy in a Federated Learning Framework: Strategies for Dynamic Clipping and Privacy Allocation. Engineering Research Express. https://doi.org/10.1088/2631-8695/ada2db
Liang, Z., & Chen, Y. (2025b). Optimizing Differential Privacy in a Federated Learning Framework: Strategies for Dynamic Clipping and Privacy Allocation. Engineering Research Express. https://doi.org/10.1088/2631-8695/ada2db
Liang, Z., & Chen, Y. (2025c). Optimizing Differential Privacy in a Federated Learning Framework: Strategies for Dynamic Clipping and Privacy Allocation. Engineering Research Express. https://doi.org/10.1088/2631-8695/ada2db
Liang, Z., & Chen, Y. (2025d). Optimizing Differential Privacy in a Federated Learning Framework: Strategies for Dynamic Clipping and Privacy Allocation. Engineering Research Express. https://doi.org/10.1088/2631-8695/ada2db
Lin, S., Wang, C., Li, H., Deng, J., Wang, Y., & Ding, C. (2020). ESMFL: Efficient and Secure Models for Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2009.01867
Lin, Y., Ren, P., Chen, Z., Ren, Z., Yu, D., Ma, J., Rijke, M. de, & Cheng, X. (2020). Meta Matrix Factorization for Federated Rating Predictions. https://doi.org/10.1145/3397271.3401081
Liu, F., Cheng, Z., Chen, H., Wei, Y., Nie, L., & Kankanhalli, M. (2022). Privacy-Preserving Synthetic Data Generation for Recommendation Systems. https://doi.org/10.1145/3477495.3532044
Liu, L., Wang, W., Zhao, X., Zhang, Z., Zhang, C., Lin, S., Wang, Y., Zou, L., Liu, Z., Wei, X., Yin, H., & Li, Q. (2024). Efficient and Robust Regularized Federated Recommendation. https://doi.org/10.1145/3627673.3679682
Liu, R., Wu, F., Wu, C., Wang, Y., Cao, Y., Lyu, L., Pan, W., Chen, Y., Chen, H., & Xie, X. (2022a). PrivateRec: Differentially Private Training and Serving for Federated News Recommendation. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2204.08146
Liu, R., Wu, F., Wu, C., Wang, Y., Cao, Y., Lyu, L., Pan, W., Chen, Y., Chen, H., & Xie, X. (2022b). PrivateRec: Differentially Private Training and Serving for Federated News Recommendation. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2204.08146
Liu, T., Wang, Z., He, H., Shi, W., Lin, L., An, R., & Li, C. (2023). Efficient and Secure Federated Learning for Financial Applications. Applied Sciences, 13(10), 5877. https://doi.org/10.3390/app13105877
Liu, X.-Y., Zhu, R., Zha, D., Gao, J., Zhong, S., White, M., & Qiu, M. (2025). Differentially Private Low-Rank Adaptation of Large Language Model Using Federated Learning. Acm Transactions on Management Information Systems. https://doi.org/10.1145/3682068
Liu, Y., Li, H., & Hao, M. (2024). Personalized and Privacy-Preserving Federated Graph Neural Network. Frontiers in Physics. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphy.2024.1383276
Liu, Y., Li, H., Qian, X., & Hao, M. (2023a). ESA-FedGNN: Efficient Secure Aggregation for Federated Graph Neural Networks. Peer-to-Peer Networking and Applications. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12083-023-01472-2
Liu, Y., Li, H., Qian, X., & Hao, M. (2023b). ESA-FedGNN: Efficient Secure Aggregation for Federated Graph Neural Networks. Peer-to-Peer Networking and Applications. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12083-023-01472-2
Liu, Y., Wu, S., Li, Y., Zhao, F., & Ren, Y. (2025). Quantization-Based Chained Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-5858510/v1
Liu, Z., Jia, Z., & Pang, X. (2023). DRL-Based Hybrid Task Offloading and Resource Allocation in Vehicular Networks. Electronics, 12(21), 4392. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics12214392
Liu, Z., Li, T., Smith, V., & Sekar, V. (2019). Enhancing the Privacy of Federated Learning With Sketching. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.1911.01812
Liu, Z., Yang, L., Fan, Z., Peng, H., & Yu, P. S. (2022). Federated Social Recommendation With Graph Neural Network. Acm Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology. https://doi.org/10.1145/3501815
Lou, M., Dong, X., Cao, Z., & Shen, J. (2021). SESCF: A Secure and Efficient Supply Chain Framework via Blockchain-Based Smart Contracts. Security and Communication Networks. https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/8884478
Lu, P. J., Jui, C.-Y., & Chuang, J. (2023). FedDAD: Federated Domain Adaptation for Object Detection. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2023.3279132
Lü, S., Gao, Z., Xu, Q., Jiang, C., Zhang, A., & Wang, X. (2022). Class-Imbalance Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning for Decentralized Fault Diagnosis With Biometric Authentication. Ieee Transactions on Industrial Informatics. https://doi.org/10.1109/tii.2022.3190034
Lu, Z. (2022). A Differentially Private Framework for Deep Learning With Convexified Loss Functions. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2204.01049
Luo, S., Xiao, Y., Zhang, X., Liu, Y., Ding, W., & Song, L. (2024). PerFedRec++: Enhancing Personalized Federated Recommendation With Self-Supervised Pre-Training. Acm Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology. https://doi.org/10.1145/3664927
Ma, T., Lü, Y., Shi, S., Tian, W., Wang, X., & Guan, D. (2014). Data Resource Discovery Model Based on Hybrid Architecture in Data Grid Environment. Concurrency and Computation Practice and Experience. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpe.3222
Maher, R., & Nasr, O. A. (2021). DropStore: A Secure Backup System Using Multi-Cloud and Fog Computing. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2021.3078887
Maheshwari, G., Denis, P., Keller, M., & Bellet, A. (2022). Fair NLP Models With Differentially Private Text Encoders. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.findings-emnlp.514
Mahmood, K., Khan, S., Abdelhaq, M., Hassan, M. ul, Uddin, M., Alsaqour, R., Awan, K. A., & Alsoufi, M. A. (2025). Adaptive Resource Aware and Privacy Preserving Federated Edge Learning Framework for Real Time Internet of Medical Things Applications. Scientific Reports. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-23398-w
Majeed, U., Khan, L. U., Hassan, S. S., Han, Z., & Hong, C. S. (2023). FL-Incentivizer: FL-NFT and FL-Tokens for Federated Learning Model Trading and Training. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2023.3235484
Mandal, K. (2020). PrivFL: Practical Privacy-Preserving Federated Regressions on High-Dimensional Data Over Mobile Networks. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2004.02264
Marion, B., Kim, R., Mahmud Chowdhury, A. M., Navarro, J., Zhang, L., & Farouk, O. (2025). Reimagining Efficiency in Vision-Language Models Through Low-Precision Training Across Modalities and Architectures. https://doi.org/10.31224/5001
Martins, W. S., Oriá, M., Chevrollier, M., & Silans, T. P. de. (2013). Selective reflection technique as a probe to monitor the growth of a metallic thin film on dielectric surfaces. Applied Optics, 52(24), 6074. https://doi.org/10.1364/AO.52.006074
Marx, M., & Fuegi, A. (2020). Reliance on Science by Inventors: Hybrid Extraction of in-Text Patent-to-Article Citations. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27987
Matsubara, Y. (2020). Split Computing for Complex Object Detectors: Challenges and Preliminary Results. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2007.13312
Matsumoto, K., Nakamura, Y., Kamouchi, M., & Steyerberg, E. W. (2025). Federated Learning Enabled Privacy-Preserving Data Access for Predicting 30-Day Mortality in Acute Myocardial Infarction. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-7454748/v1
Matysiak, J. (2015). Bivariate natural exponential families with quadratic diagonal of the variance function (arXiv:1504.05219). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1504.05219
Mavromoustakis, C. X., Mastorakis, G., & Mongay Batalla, J. (2019). A Mobile Edge Computing Model Enabling Efficient Computation Offload-Aware Energy Conservation. IEEE Access, 7, 102295–102303. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2019.2931362
McLean, M. (2019). Floer Cohomology, Multiplicity and the Log Canonical Threshold. Geometry & Topology, 23(2), 957–1056. https://doi.org/10.2140/gt.2019.23.957
McMahan, H. B., Moore, E., Ramage, D., Hampson, S., & Arcas, B. A. y. (2023a). Communication-Efficient Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data (arXiv:1602.05629). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1602.05629
McMahan, H. B., Moore, E., Ramage, D., Hampson, S., & Arcas, B. A. y. (2023b). Communication-Efficient Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data (arXiv:1602.05629). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1602.05629
McMahan, H. B., Moore, E., Ramage, D., Hampson, S., & Arcas, B. A. y. (2023c). Communication-Efficient Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data (arXiv:1602.05629). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1602.05629
McSherry, F., & Mironov, I. (2009). Differentially private recommender systems: Building privacy into the Netflix Prize contenders. Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 627–636. https://doi.org/10.1145/1557019.1557090
Mdhaffar, S., Tommasi, M., & Estève, Y. (2021). Study on Acoustic Model Personalization in a Context of Collaborative Learning Constrained by Privacy Preservation. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-87802-3_39
Mehta, A. D. (2025). Federated Curriculum Learning for Privacy-Preserving Personalization in Edge Environments. Darpan International Research Analysis, 13(4), 38–48. https://doi.org/10.36676/dira.v13.i4.182
Minto, L., Haller, M., Haddadi, H., & Livshits, B. (2021). Stronger Privacy for Federated Collaborative Filtering With Implicit Feedback. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2105.03941
Mohammadi, N., Bai, J., Fan, Q., Song, Y., Yi, Y., & Liu, L. (2022). Differential Privacy Meets Federated Learning Under Communication Constraints. Ieee Internet of Things Journal. https://doi.org/10.1109/jiot.2021.3101991
M.Saraswathi. (2025). Adaptive Spectrum Sensing and Management in Cognitive Radio Networks Using Federated Deep Reinforcement Learning. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-7585019/v1
Mugunthan, V., Peraire-Bueno, A., & Kagal, L. (2020). PrivacyFL. https://doi.org/10.1145/3340531.3412771
Müllner, P., Lex, E., Schedl, M., & Kowald, D. (2023). Differential Privacy in Collaborative Filtering Recommender Systems: A Review. Frontiers in Big Data. https://doi.org/10.3389/fdata.2023.1249997
Munusamy, S., & Jothi, K. (2025). Blockchain-Enabled Federated Learning With Edge Analytics for Secure and Efficient Electronic Health Records Management. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-6678464/v1
Murray, I. (2016). Differentiation of the Cholesky decomposition (arXiv:1602.07527). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1602.07527
Naher, K., & Uddin, M. S. (2023). Exploring the Influence of Blockchain in the Financial Services: Quick Assessment of Its Applications Across Various Financial Domains. Financial Statistical Journal. https://doi.org/10.24294/fsj.v6i1.2228
Nanayakkara, P., Bater, J., He, X., Hullman, J., & Rogers, J. (2022). Visualizing Privacy-Utility Trade-Offs in Differentially Private Data Releases. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies. https://doi.org/10.2478/popets-2022-0058
Naor, M., & Nissim, K. (2001). Communication Complexity and Secure Function Evaluation (Version 1). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.CS/0109011
Narayanan, A., & Shmatikov, V. (2007a). How To Break Anonymity of the Netflix Prize Dataset (arXiv:cs/0610105). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.cs/0610105
Narayanan, A., & Shmatikov, V. (2007b). How To Break Anonymity of the Netflix Prize Dataset (arXiv:cs/0610105). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.cs/0610105
Narayanan, A., & Shmatikov, V. (2008). Robust De-anonymization of Large Sparse Datasets. 2008 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (Sp 2008), 111–125. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2008.33
Naresh, V. S., Raju, A., & Rao, O. S. (2025). Secure Multiparty Computation for Privacy‐Preserving Machine Learning in Healthcare: A Comprehensive Survey. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews Computational Statistics. https://doi.org/10.1002/wics.70046
Nasir, J., Kothiyal, A., Bruno, B., & Dillenbourg, P. (2022). Correction To: Many Are the Ways to Learn: Identifying Multi-Modal Behavioral Profiles of Collaborative Learning in Constructivist Activities. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 20(2), 283–284. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-022-09368-8
Nassar, M. O., & Al-Mashagba, F. F. (2025). PRIFLEX: A Secure Federated Learning Framework for Evaluating Privacy Leakage and Defense in Cross-Modal Medical Data. Mesopotamian Journal of CyberSecurity. https://doi.org/10.58496//mjcs/2025/057
Natarajan, H. P. (2025a). Privacy Preserving Federated Reinforcement Imitation Learning Framework With Robust Aggregation for Cloud‐Based Domestic Robots. Concurrency and Computation Practice and Experience. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpe.70153
Natarajan, H. P. (2025b). Privacy Preserving Federated Reinforcement Imitation Learning Framework With Robust Aggregation for Cloud‐Based Domestic Robots. Concurrency and Computation Practice and Experience. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpe.70153
Nitin Sakhare, E. al. (2024). A Decentralized Approach to Threat Intelligence Using Federated Learning in Privacy-Preserving Cyber Security. Jes. https://doi.org/10.52783/jes.658
Odera, D. (2023). Federated Learning and Differential Privacy in Clinical Health: Extensive Survey. World Journal of Advanced Engineering Technology and Sciences. https://doi.org/10.30574/wjaets.2023.8.2.0113
Osamika, D., Adelusi, B., Kelvin-Agwu, M. C., Mustapha, A. K., & Ikhalea, N. (2024). A Predictive Analytics Framework for Early Detection and Management of Cancer Using Multi-Source Health Data. Ijmor. https://doi.org/10.54660/ijmor.2024.3.1.223-233
Otari, M. S., Patil, D., & Patil, M. B. (2025). Modular Federated Cross-Domain Recommendation (MFCDR) With a Projected Attention Network. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-6530937/v1
Otoum, Y., Yadlapalli, S. K., & Nayak, A. (2022a). FTLIoT: A Federated Transfer Learning Framework for Securing IoT. https://doi.org/10.1109/globecom48099.2022.10001461
Otoum, Y., Yadlapalli, S. K., & Nayak, A. (2022b). FTLIoT: A Federated Transfer Learning Framework for Securing IoT. https://doi.org/10.1109/globecom48099.2022.10001461
Oyekan, B. (2024). Developing Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning Models for Collaborative Health Data Analysis Across Multiple Institutions Without Compromising Data Security. Journal of Knowledge Learning and Science Technology Issn 2959-6386 (Online). https://doi.org/10.60087/jklst.vol3.n3.p139-164
Padala, M., Damle, S., & Gujar, S. (2021a). Federated Learning Meets Fairness and Differential Privacy. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2108.09932
Padala, M., Damle, S., & Gujar, S. (2021b). Federated Learning Meets Fairness and Differential Privacy. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2108.09932
Pan, C., Xu, J., Yu, Y., Yang, Z., Wu, Q., Wang, C., Chen, L., & Yang, Y. (2024). Towards Fair Graph Federated Learning via Incentive Mechanisms. Proceedings of the Aaai Conference on Artificial Intelligence. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v38i13.29365
Pan, J., Lin, Z., Zhu, X., Shao, J., & Li, H. (2022). ST-Adapter: Parameter-Efficient Image-to-Video Transfer Learning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2206.13559
Pandey, R. K. (2025). Federated Learning for Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning: A Comprehensive Review of Techniques, Architectures, and Open Research Directions. International Journal of Apllied Mathematics. https://doi.org/10.12732/ijam.v38i3s.149
Pang, B., Liang, H., Zhang, L.-H., Teng, Y., Chang, Z., Liu, Z., Hu, C., & Mou, W.-H. (2023). An Improved Federated Learning-Assisted Data Aggregation Scheme for Smart Grids. Applied Sciences. https://doi.org/10.3390/app13179813
Panisson, A., da Rosa, D. M., Melchiors, C., Granville, L. Z., Bosquiroli Almeida, M. J., & Rockenbach Tarouco, L. M. (2006). Designing the Architecture of P2p-Based Network Management Systems. https://doi.org/10.1109/iscc.2006.60
Park, N. (2025). Identifying Imaging Follow-Up in Radiology Reports: A Comparative Analysis of Traditional ML and LLM Approaches. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2511.11867
Parra‐Arnau, J., Rebollo‐Monedero, D., & Forné, J. (2014). Optimal Forgery and Suppression of Ratings for Privacy Enhancement in Recommendation Systems. Entropy. https://doi.org/10.3390/e16031586
Pasupuleti, M. K. (2024). Machine Learning and Deep Learning in Financial Market Predictions: Strategies for Risk and Volatility Management. https://doi.org/10.62311/nesx/66265
Patel, D. (2025). AI-Driven Automation of Patient Data Integration in Complex Healthcare Systems. European Journal of Biology and Medical Science Research. https://doi.org/10.37745/ejbmsr.2013/vol13n23649
Paulson, D., & Elvis, G. (2025). Differential Privacy Techniques in Machine Learning for Health Record Analysis. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202506.1752.v1
Peng, C., Li, L., & Peng, D. (2025). A Method‐Oriented Review of Explainable Artificial Intelligence for Neurological Medical Imaging. Expert Systems. https://doi.org/10.1111/exsy.70111
Peng, H. (2021). Differentially Private Federated Knowledge Graphs Embedding. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2105.07615
Peng, K., Shen, X., Gao, L., Wang, B., & Lu, Y. (2023). Communication-Efficient and Privacy-Preserving Verifiable Aggregation for Federated Learning. Entropy. https://doi.org/10.3390/e25081125
Pentyala, S., Neophytou, N., A. Nascimento, A. C., Cock, M. D., & Farnadi, G. (2022a). PrivFairFL: Privacy-Preserving Group Fairness in Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2205.11584
Pentyala, S., Neophytou, N., A. Nascimento, A. C., Cock, M. D., & Farnadi, G. (2022b). PrivFairFL: Privacy-Preserving Group Fairness in Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2205.11584
Pestana, G., & Sofou, S. (2024). Data Governance to Counter Hybrid Threats Against Critical Infrastructures. Smart Cities. https://doi.org/10.3390/smartcities7040072
Pittala, S. K. (2024). Federated Learning and Privacy-Preserving AI for Smart Healthcare Systems. International Journal of Future Engineering Innovations. https://doi.org/10.54660/ijfei.2024.1.2.48-52
Prasad, K., Ghosh, S., Cormode, G., Mironov, I., Yousefpour, A., & Stock, P. (2022). Reconciling Security and Communication Efficiency in Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2207.12779
Priyadarsini, N. I., & Raja, G. (2024). Federated Learning Implementation With Privacy Leakage Prevention for Hand-Written Digit Recognition. International Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering Systems. https://doi.org/10.32985/ijeces.15.5.4
Qi, T., Wu, F., Wu, C., He, L., Huang, Y., & Xie, X. (2023a). Differentially Private Knowledge Transfer for Federated Learning. Nature Communications. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-38794-x
Qi, T., Wu, F., Wu, C., He, L., Huang, Y., & Xie, X. (2023b). Differentially Private Knowledge Transfer for Federated Learning. Nature Communications. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-38794-x
Qi, T., Wu, F., Wu, C., Huang, Y., & Xie, X. (2020). Privacy-Preserving News Recommendation Model Learning. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.128
Qiu, Y., Huang, C., Wang, J., Huang, Z., & Xiao, J. (2022). A Privacy-Preserving Subgraph-Level Federated Graph Neural Network Via Differential Privacy. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-10989-8_14
Raheem, A. (2025). Adaptive Dual‐Model Federated Learning for Generalizable Brain Tumor Segmentation. International Journal of Imaging Systems and Technology. https://doi.org/10.1002/ima.70223
Rahman, A., Iqbal, A., Ahmed, E., Tanvirahmedshuvo, & Hossain -, M. R. (2024). Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning: Techniques, Challenges, and Future Directions in Safeguarding Personal Data Management. Ijbms. https://doi.org/10.55640/ijbms-04-12-03
Rahman, M. A., Datta, A., & Al‐Shaer, E. (2021). Automated Configuration Synthesis for Resilient Smart Metering Infrastructure. Icst Transactions on Security and Safety. https://doi.org/10.4108/eai.10-9-2021.170948
Raj, G. (2025a). A Privacy‐Preserving and Interpretable Federated Learning Framework With Clinician Feedback for Multi‐Hospital Clinical Decision Support. Concurrency and Computation Practice and Experience. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpe.70365
Raj, G. (2025b). A Privacy‐Preserving and Interpretable Federated Learning Framework With Clinician Feedback for Multi‐Hospital Clinical Decision Support. Concurrency and Computation Practice and Experience. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpe.70365
Rane, N. L., Mallick, S. K., Kaya, Ö., & Rane, J. (2024). Emerging Trends and Future Directions in Machine Learning and Deep Learning Architectures. https://doi.org/10.70593/978-81-981271-4-3_10
Rao, J., Gao, S., Li, M., & Huang, Q. (2021). A Privacy‐preserving Framework for Location Recommendation Using Decentralized Collaborative Machine Learning. Transactions in Gis. https://doi.org/10.1111/tgis.12769
Raza, S., Rahman, M., Kamawal, S., Toroghi, A., Raval, A., Navah, F., & Kazemeini, A. (2026). A comprehensive review of recommender systems: Transitioning from theory to practice. Computer Science Review, 59, 100849. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosrev.2025.100849
Reddy, A. (2025). Privacy-Preserving AI Models for Secure Healthcare Data in the Cloud. FTSHSL. https://doi.org/10.69888/ftshsl.2025.000363
Research, H. S., Bhaladhare, P., & Potgantwar, A. (2024a). PMNBARL: Enhancing Efficiency of Privacy Management in Digital Networks Through Blockchain and Adaptive Reinforcement Learning. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-4121481/v1
Research, H. S., Bhaladhare, P., & Potgantwar, A. (2024b). PMNBARL: Enhancing Efficiency of Privacy Management in Digital Networks Through Blockchain and Adaptive Reinforcement Learning. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-4121481/v1
Reshi, I. A., Khan, M., shafi, S., Sholla, S., Assad, A., & Shafi, H. (2023). AI-Powered Smart Contracts: The Dawn of Web 4. O. https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.22189438
Ribero, M., Henderson, J., Williamson, S. A., & Vikalo, H. (2020). Federating Recommendations Using Differentially Private Prototypes. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2003.00602
Rinott, Y., O’Keefe, C. M., Shlomo, N., & Skinner, C. (2018). Confidentiality and Differential Privacy in the Dissemination of Frequency Tables. Statistical Science. https://doi.org/10.1214/17-sts641
Rodio, A. (2025). The Many Facets of Variance Reduction in Federated Learning. Acm Sigmetrics Performance Evaluation Review, 52(4), 11–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3725536.3725542
Rodríguez-Gálvez, B., Granqvist, F., Dalen, R. van, & Seigel, M. (2021a). Enforcing Fairness in Private Federated Learning via the Modified Method of Differential Multipliers. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2109.08604
Rodríguez-Gálvez, B., Granqvist, F., Dalen, R. van, & Seigel, M. (2021b). Enforcing Fairness in Private Federated Learning via the Modified Method of Differential Multipliers. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2109.08604
Rokade, M. D. (2024a). Advancements in Privacy-Preserving Techniques for Federated Learning: A Machine Learning Perspective. Jes. https://doi.org/10.52783/jes.1754
Rokade, M. D. (2024b). Advancements in Privacy-Preserving Techniques for Federated Learning: A Machine Learning Perspective. Jes. https://doi.org/10.52783/jes.1754
Rokade, M. D. (2024c). Advancements in Privacy-Preserving Techniques for Federated Learning: A Machine Learning Perspective. Jes. https://doi.org/10.52783/jes.1754
Saidi, A., & Khouri, A. O. (2025). Enhancing Data Privacy in Intrusion Detection: A Federated Learning Framework With Differential Privacy. Concurrency and Computation Practice and Experience. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpe.70186
Salem, A. B., Khalfoun, B., Mokhtar, S. B., & Mashhadi, A. (2022). Quantifying Fairness of Federated Learning LPPM Models. https://doi.org/10.1145/3498361.3538788
Samee, N. A., Khan, U., Khan, S., Jamjoom, M., Sharif, M., & Kim, D. H. (2023a). Safeguarding Online Spaces: A Powerful Fusion of Federated Learning, Word Embeddings, and Emotional Features for Cyberbullying Detection. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2023.3329347
Samee, N. A., Khan, U., Khan, S., Jamjoom, M., Sharif, M., & Kim, D. H. (2023b). Safeguarding Online Spaces: A Powerful Fusion of Federated Learning, Word Embeddings, and Emotional Features for Cyberbullying Detection. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2023.3329347
Sandhya, H., D, K., & Manjunath, T. C. (2025). A Comprehensive Review of Federated Learning and Explainable AI Approaches for Privacy-Preserving Breast Cancer Detection: Advancements in Multi-Modal Data Fusion, Interpretability, and Clinical Trust. International Research Journal on Advanced Engineering and Management (Irjaem). https://doi.org/10.47392/irjaem.2025.0471
Sangeeta, N., & Nam, S. Y. (2023). Blockchain and Interplanetary File System (IPFS)-Based Data Storage System for Vehicular Networks With Keyword Search Capability. Electronics. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics12071545
Sangeetha, M. (2025a). Distributed Learning for Heart Disease Risk Prediction Based on Key Clinical Parameters With Evaluation Metrics Analysis. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-6449815/v1
Sangeetha, M. (2025b). Distributed Learning for Heart Disease Risk Prediction Based on Key Clinical Parameters With Evaluation Metrics Analysis. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-6449815/v1
Saraswat, D., Bhattacharya, P., Verma, A., Prasad, V. K., Tanwar, S., Sharma, G., Bokoro, P. N., & Sharma, R. (2022). Explainable AI for Healthcare 5.0: Opportunities and Challenges. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2022.3197671
Satilmisoglu, T. K., & Keskin, H. (2023). Smart Water Chain: Immutable, Distributed and Decentralized Water Transaction Ledgers. Iop Conference Series Earth and Environmental Science. https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/1136/1/012014
Scheibehenne, B., Greifeneder, R., & Todd, P. M. (2010). Can There Ever Be Too Many Options? A Meta-Analytic Review of Choice Overload. Journal of Consumer Research, 37(3), 409–425. https://doi.org/10.1086/651235
Schnabel, T., Swaminathan, A., Singh, A., Chandak, N., & Joachims, T. (2016). Recommendations as Treatments: Debiasing Learning and Evaluation (arXiv:1602.05352). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1602.05352
Schwarz, M., Weiser, S., Gruss, D., Maurice, C., & Mangard, S. (2019). Malware Guard Extension: Using SGX to Conceal Cache Attacks (arXiv:1702.08719). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1702.08719
Sekti, B. A. (2025). Adversarial Machine Learning in Industrial Cybersecurity. https://doi.org/10.4018/979-8-3373-3241-3.ch018
Sengupta, P., Paul, S., & Mishra, S. (2020). Learning With Differential Privacy. https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-7998-5728-0.ch019
Shahsavari, Y., Baseri, Y., Hafid, A., Dambri, O. A., & Makrakis, D. (2025). Integration of Federated Learning and Blockchain in Healthcare: A Tutorial on Medical Data, Architectures, Privacy, Security, and Regulatory Compliance (Preprint). https://doi.org/10.2196/preprints.80178
Shaik, T. (2025). Quantum Machine Unlearning: Foundations, Mechanisms, and Taxonomy. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2511.00406
Shakeer, S. M., & Babu, M. R. (2025). IoT-Enhanced Additive Manufacturing and Federated Learning for Smart Healthcare Systems. https://doi.org/10.4018/979-8-3693-6094-1.ch007
Shalabi, E. (2025). A Survey of Federated Learning Privacy Preservation Techniques for Malicious Behavior Detection. Journal of Information Systems Engineering & Management, 10(51s), 659–667. https://doi.org/10.52783/jisem.v10i51s.10438
Shallom, K., & Ikemefuna, C. D. (2025). Enhancing Malware Detection Using Federated Learning and Explainable AI for Privacy-Preserving Threat Intelligence. World Journal of Advanced Research and Reviews. https://doi.org/10.30574/wjarr.2025.27.1.2541
Sharma, M., Tripathi, S., Dubey, A., Jayadeva, Guruju, S., & Goalla, N. (2019). Smaller Models, Better Generalization. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.1908.11250
Sharma, S., Sharma, T., Tiwari, A., & Gupta, S. (2024). Streamlining IoT-driven Data Using Blockchain. Int Res J Adv Engg MGT. https://doi.org/10.47392/irjaem.2024.0204
Shen, C., Zhang, W., Zhou, T., & Zhang, L. (2024). A Security-Enhanced Federated Learning Scheme Based on Homomorphic Encryption and Secret Sharing. Mathematics. https://doi.org/10.3390/math12131993
Shen, J., Zhu, X., Chen, J., Tao, P., & Wu, X. (2019). Investigation on the Edge Chipping in Ultrasonic Assisted Sawing of Monocrystalline Silicon. Micromachines. https://doi.org/10.3390/mi10090616
Shen, W.-H., Wu, S., & Tao, Y.-H. (2024). CLDP-pFedAvg: Safeguarding Client Data Privacy in Personalized Federated Averaging. Mathematics. https://doi.org/10.3390/math12223630
Shen, X., Ge, M., & Fu, K.-A. (2020). APPROXIMATION OF THE TAIL PROBABILITIES FOR BIDIMENSIONAL RANDOMLY WEIGHTED SUMS WITH DEPENDENT COMPONENTS. Probability in the Engineering and Informational Sciences, 34(1), 112–130. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269964818000414
Sheng, T., Feng, C., Zhuo, S., Zhang, X., Shen, L., & Aleksic, M. (2018). A Quantization-Friendly Separable Convolution for MobileNets. https://doi.org/10.1109/emc2.2018.00011
Sheng, X., Yu, C., Zhou, Y., & Cui, X. (2024). Reputation-Driven Asynchronous Federated Learning for Optimizing Communication Efficiency in Big Data Labeling Systems. Mathematics. https://doi.org/10.3390/math12182932
Shiranthika, C., Saeedi, P., & Bajić, I. V. (2023a). Decentralized Learning in Healthcare: A Review of Emerging Techniques. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2023.3281832
Shiranthika, C., Saeedi, P., & Bajić, I. V. (2023b). Decentralized Learning in Healthcare: A Review of Emerging Techniques. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2023.3281832
Shokri, R., Stronati, M., Song, C., & Shmatikov, V. (2017a). Membership Inference Attacks Against Machine Learning Models. 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), 3–18. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2017.41
Shokri, R., Stronati, M., Song, C., & Shmatikov, V. (2017b). Membership Inference Attacks against Machine Learning Models (arXiv:1610.05820). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1610.05820
Shokri, R., Stronati, M., Song, C., & Shmatikov, V. (2017c). Membership Inference Attacks against Machine Learning Models (arXiv:1610.05820). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1610.05820
Shumba, A. T., Montanaro, T., Sergi, I., Bramanti, A., Ciccarelli, M., Rispoli, A., Carrizzo, A., Vittorio, M. D., & Patrono, L. (2023). Wearable Technologies and AI at the Far Edge for Chronic Heart Failure Prevention and Management: A Systematic Review and Prospects. Sensors. https://doi.org/10.3390/s23156896
Silva, A., Metcalf, K., Apostoloff, N., & Theobald, B.-J. (2022). FedEmbed: Personalized Private Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2202.09472
Singh, J., Aqsa, Ghani, I., Sonani, R., & Govindarajan, V. (2025). Privacy-Aware Hierarchical Federated Learning in Healthcare: Integrating Differential Privacy and Secure Multi-Party Computation. Future Internet, 17(8), 345. https://doi.org/10.3390/fi17080345
Siniosoglou, I., Argyriou, V., Sarigiannidis, P., Λάγκας, Θ., Sarigiannidis, A., Goudos, S. K., & Wan, S. (2023). Post-Processing Fairness Evaluation of Federated Models: An Unsupervised Approach in Healthcare. Ieee/Acm Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics. https://doi.org/10.1109/tcbb.2023.3269767
Siva, O. V., & Anbarasi, M. S. (2025). A Federated Graph-Based Multimodal AI Framework for Privacy-Preserving and Explainable Osteoporosis Detection. International Journal on Artificial Intelligence Tools. https://doi.org/10.1142/s0218213025500095
Skalka, C., & Near, J. P. (2025). SMT-Boosted Security Types for Low-Level MPC (arXiv:2501.17824). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2501.17824
Solat, F. (2025). Optimizing Client Participation in Communication-Constrained Federated LLM Adaptation With LoRA. Sensors. https://doi.org/10.3390/s25216538
Song, R., Zhou, L., Lakshminarasimhan, V., Festag, A., & Knoll, A. (2022). Federated Learning Framework Coping With Hierarchical Heterogeneity in Cooperative ITS. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2204.00215
Song, Y. (2024). Improving the Performance and Efficiency of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) on Image Classification Tasks via Fixed-Point Quantization and Structured Pruning. Frontiers in Computing and Intelligent Systems. https://doi.org/10.54097/cmc21d96
Song, Y., Wu, Y., & Xue, Y. (2024). University Major Information Recommendation Based on Federated Learning. Applied and Computational Engineering. https://doi.org/10.54254/2755-2721/40/20230667
Soni, G. (2025). Decoding Efficiency: A Comprehensive Review of Knowledge Distillation Techniques in Large Language Model. International Journal for Research in Applied Science and Engineering Technology. https://doi.org/10.22214/ijraset.2025.73930
Soundararajan, B. (2025). Developing New AI Model Compression Techniques. Interantional Journal of Scientific Research in Engineering and Management. https://doi.org/10.55041/ijsrem43474
Srikanth Vutukuru, E. al. (2024). SecureIoT: Novel Machine Learning Algorithms for Detecting and Preventing Attacks on IoT Devices. Jes. https://doi.org/10.52783/jes.641
Subramanian, R. (2022). Have the Cake and Eat It Too: Differential Privacy Enables Privacy and Precise Analytics. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-1847248/v1
Sun, C., Li, D., Wang, B., & Song, J. (2023). AI-Enabled Consensus Algorithm in Human-Centric Collaborative Computing for Internet of Vehicle. Symmetry. https://doi.org/10.3390/sym15061264
Sun, G., Mendieta, M., Yang, T., & Chen, C. (2022). Exploring Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning to Enable Foundation Models in Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2210.01708
Sun, H., Ma, X., & Hu, R. Q. (2020). Adaptive Federated Learning With Gradient Compression in Uplink NOMA. Ieee Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 69(12), 16325–16329. https://doi.org/10.1109/tvt.2020.3027306
Sun, J. A., Pentyala, S., Cock, M. D., & Farnadi, G. (2023a). Privacy-Preserving Fair Item Ranking. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2303.02916
Sun, J. A., Pentyala, S., Cock, M. D., & Farnadi, G. (2023b). Privacy-Preserving Fair Item Ranking. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2303.02916
Sun, K. (2025a). Accurate Target Privacy Preserving Federated Learning Balancing Fairness and Utility. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2510.26841
Sun, K. (2025b). Accurate Target Privacy Preserving Federated Learning Balancing Fairness and Utility. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2510.26841
Sun, K. (2025c). Accurate Target Privacy Preserving Federated Learning Balancing Fairness and Utility. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2510.26841
Sun, Y. (2024). Optimizing Federated Learning Efficiency: A Comparative Analysis of Model Compression Techniques for Communication Reduction. Applied and Computational Engineering. https://doi.org/10.54254/2755-2721/107/20241215
Sun, Y., Liu, C., Weng, Y., & Liu, Y. (2025). Federated Learning-Based Intrusion Detection System for Industrial Internet of Things: Enhancing Security and Efficiency. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.3052237
Sun, Y., T. Chong, N. S., & Ochiai, H. (2022). Feature Distribution Matching for Federated Domain Generalization. https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.19575760.v2
T, T. C., & Tan, X. (2017). Optimal Estimation of a Quadratic Functional Under the Gaussian Two-Sequence Model. Statistica Sinica. https://doi.org/10.5705/ss.202016.0074
Taherisadr, M., Stavroulakis, S., & Elmalaki, S. (2023). adaPARL: Adaptive Privacy-Aware Reinforcement Learning for Sequential Decision Making Human-in-the-Loop Systems. https://doi.org/10.1145/3576842.3582325
TAN, X. (2024). Privacy Preserving Machine Learning in Energy Services: A Survey. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.3021531
Tang, R., Wang, Z., Peng, Y., Zeng, Z., Zhang, T., Shen, Y., School of Management Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Finance &amp; Economics, Nanjing 210023, China, School of Government, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen 518172, China, School of Public Policy, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518172, China, College of Art &amp; Science, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA, & Shenzhen Finance Institute, School of Management and Economics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518172, China. (2025). When engagement performs better: Revenue management on user-generated content platforms. Journal of Industrial and Management Optimization, 22(1), 282–309. https://doi.org/10.3934/jimo.2026011
Tang, W., Wei, X., & Li, B. (2020). Automated Model Compression by Jointly Applied Pruning and Quantization. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2011.06231
Tang, Y., & Deng, Y. (2024). Current Research and Prospects of Federated Language Large Models in the Medical Field. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.3036891
Tang, Y., Pan, D., Qin, P., & Lv, L. (2023). Lattice-Based Group Signature With Message Recovery for Federal Learning. Applied Sciences. https://doi.org/10.3390/app13159007
Tanveer, F., Iradat, F., Iqbal, W., AlSagri, H. S., A. Alhakbani, H. A., Ahmad, A., & Khan, F. A. (2025a). Balancing Privacy and Performance in Healthcare: A Federated Learning Framework for Sensitive Data. Digital Health. https://doi.org/10.1177/20552076251381769
Tanveer, F., Iradat, F., Iqbal, W., AlSagri, H. S., A. Alhakbani, H. A., Ahmad, A., & Khan, F. A. (2025b). Balancing Privacy and Performance in Healthcare: A Federated Learning Framework for Sensitive Data. Digital Health. https://doi.org/10.1177/20552076251381769
Tanveer, F., Iradat, F., Iqbal, W., AlSagri, H. S., A. Alhakbani, H. A., Ahmad, A., & Khan, F. A. (2025c). Balancing Privacy and Performance in Healthcare: A Federated Learning Framework for Sensitive Data. Digital Health. https://doi.org/10.1177/20552076251381769
Tao, Y., You, C., Zhang, P., & Huang, K. (2019). Stochastic Control of Computation Offloading to a Helper With a Dynamically Loaded CPU. Ieee Transactions on Wireless Communications. https://doi.org/10.1109/twc.2018.2890653
Tariq, U. (2022). Rampant Smoothing (RTS) Algorithm: An Optimized Consensus Mechanism for Private Blockchain Enabled Technologies. Eurasip Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13638-022-02123-5
Tatarnikova, T. M., & Raskopina, A. S. (2025). Analyzing the Effectiveness of Post-Learning Quantization for Optimizing Neural Networks. H&es Research. https://doi.org/10.36724/2409-5419-2025-17-2-4-10
Tedeschi, P., Piro, G., Sanchez Murillo, J. A., Ignjatov, N., Pilc, M., Lebloch, K., & Boggia, G. (2018). Blockchain as a Service: Securing Bartering Functionalities in the H2020 symbIoTe Framework. Internet Technology Letters. https://doi.org/10.1002/itl2.72
Teranishi, K., & Kogiso, K. (2023). Optimal Security Parameter for Encrypted Control Systems Against Eavesdropper and Malicious Server (arXiv:2303.13059). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.13059
Teryak, H., Albaseer, A., Abdallah, M., Al‐Kuwari, S., & Qaraqe, M. (2023). Double-Edged Defense: Thwarting Cyber Attacks and Adversarial Machine Learning in IEC 60870-5-104 Smart Grids. Ieee Open Journal of the Industrial Electronics Society. https://doi.org/10.1109/ojies.2023.3336234
Thanikasalam, A. (2026). Federated Learning and Data Privacy in Connected Healthcare Devices. https://doi.org/10.71443/9789349552036-13
Thuau, S. (2025). Federated Learning for Video Violence Detection: Complementary Roles of Lightweight CNNs and Vision-Language Models for Energy-Efficient Use. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2511.07171
Tian, J., Dai, X., Ma, C., He, Z., Liu, Y., & Kira, Z. (2023). Trainable Projected Gradient Method for Robust Fine-Tuning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2303.10720
Tong, X., Hamzei, M., & Jafari, N. (2025). Towards Secure and Efficient Data Aggregation in Blockchain‐Driven <scp>IoT</Scp> Environments: A Comprehensive and Systematic Study. Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies. https://doi.org/10.1002/ett.70061
Tran, C., Zhü, K., Fioretto, F., & Hentenryck, P. V. (2022). SF-PATE: Scalable, Fair, and Private Aggregation of Teacher Ensembles. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2204.05157
Tran, H.-Y., Hu, J., Yin, X., & Pota, H. R. (2023). An Efficient Privacy-Enhancing Cross-Silo Federated Learning and Applications for False Data Injection Attack Detection in Smart Grids. Ieee Transactions on Information Forensics and Security. https://doi.org/10.1109/tifs.2023.3267892
Trebbau, S., Wizenty, P., & Sachweh, S. (2021). Towards Integrating Blockchains With Microservice Architecture Using Model-Driven Engineering. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-88583-0_16
Tricomi, G., Giacobbe, M., Ficili, I., Peditto, N., & Puliafito, A. (2024). Smart City as Cooperating Smart Areas: On the Way of Symbiotic Cyber–Physical Systems Environment. Sensors. https://doi.org/10.3390/s24103108
Tschirner, S., Tripathi, S., Roeper, M., Becker, M. M., & Skwarek, V. (2022). Moving Smart Contracts – A Privacy Preserving Method for Off-Chain Data Trust. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2205.08440
Umejiaku, A. P., & Sheng, V. S. (2024). RoseCliff Algorithm: Making Passwords Dynamic. Applied Sciences. https://doi.org/10.3390/app14020723
Upreti, D., Yang, E., Kim, H., & Seo, C. (2024). A Comprehensive Survey on Federated Learning in the Healthcare Area: Concept and Applications. Computer Modeling in Engineering &Amp; Sciences, 140(3), 2239–2274. https://doi.org/10.32604/cmes.2024.048932
Urblik, L., Kajáti, E., Papcun, P., & Zolotová, I. (2023). A Modular Framework for Data Processing at the Edge: Design and Implementation. Sensors. https://doi.org/10.3390/s23177662
Usman, M., Bernardi, M. L., & Cimitile, M. (2025). Introducing a Quality-Driven Approach for Federated Learning. Sensors. https://doi.org/10.3390/s25103083
Valdez, A. C., & Ziefle, M. (2019). The Users’ Perspective on the Privacy-Utility Trade-Offs in Health Recommender Systems. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2018.04.003
Vasquez, K., Venkatesha, Y., Bhattacharjee, A., Moitra, A., & Panda, P. (2021). Activation Density Based Mixed-Precision Quantization for Energy Efficient Neural Networks. https://doi.org/10.23919/date51398.2021.9474031
Vijay, B. T. (2025a). Federated Reinforcement Learning for Distributed MAC Optimization in IEEE 802.11bn Networks. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-7128890/v1
Vijay, B. T. (2025b). Federated Reinforcement Learning for Distributed MAC Optimization in IEEE 802.11bn Networks. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-7128890/v1
Vinterbo, S. A., Sarwate, A. D., & Boxwala, A. A. (2012). Protecting Count Queries in Study Design. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. https://doi.org/10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000459
Wagh, S. (2025). Private Map-Secure Reduce: Infrastructure for Efficient AI Data Markets. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2511.02055
Wan, X., Zheng, Y., Li, Q., Fu, A., Su, M., & Gao, Y. (2022). Towards Privacy-Preserving and Verifiable Federated Matrix Factorization. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2204.01601
Wang, A., Zhang, Y., & Yan, Y. (2021). Heterogeneous Defect Prediction Based on Federated Transfer Learning via Knowledge Distillation. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2021.3058886
Wang, J., Charles, Z., Xu, Z., Joshi, G., McMahan, H. B., Arcas, B. A. y, Al-Shedivat, M., Andrew, G., Avestimehr, S., Daly, K., Data, D., Diggavi, S., Eichner, H., Gadhikar, A., Garrett, Z., Girgis, A. M., Hanzely, F., Hard, A., He, C., … Zhu, W. (2021). A Field Guide to Federated Optimization (arXiv:2107.06917). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2107.06917
Wang, J., Charles, Z., Xu, Z., Joshi, G., McMahan, H. B., y Arcas, B. A., Al-Shedivat, M., Andrew, G., Avestimehr, S., Daly, K., Data, D., Diggavi, S., Eichner, H., Gadhikar, A., Garrett, Z., Girgis, A. M., Hanzely, F., Hard, A., He, C., … Zhu, W. (2021b). A Field Guide to Federated Optimization. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2107.06917
Wang, J., Xia, Z., Chen, Y., Hu, C., & Yu, F. (2022). Intrusion Detection Framework Based on Homomorphic Encryption in AMI Network. Frontiers in Physics, 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphy.2022.1102892
Wang, K. I., Zhou, X., Liang, W., Yan, Z., & She, J. (2022). Federated Transfer Learning Based Cross-Domain Prediction for Smart Manufacturing. Ieee Transactions on Industrial Informatics. https://doi.org/10.1109/tii.2021.3088057
Wang, L., Fan, B., Guo, Z., Zhao, Y., Zhang, R., Li, R., Gong, W., & Wang, E. (2021). Knowledge-Supervised Learning: Knowledge Consensus Constraints for Person Re-Identification. https://doi.org/10.1145/3474085.3475340
Wang, S. (2024). A Study of Data Heterogeneity in Federated Learning. Applied and Computational Engineering. https://doi.org/10.54254/2755-2721/40/20230643
Wang, S., Suwandi, R. C., & Chang, T. (2021). Demystifying Model Averaging for Communication-Efficient Federated Matrix Factorization. https://doi.org/10.1109/icassp39728.2021.9413927
Wang, W. (2024a). Empowering Safe and Secure Autonomy: Federated Learning in the Era of Autonomous Driving. Applied and Computational Engineering. https://doi.org/10.54254/2755-2721/51/20241158
Wang, W. (2024b). Empowering Safe and Secure Autonomy: Federated Learning in the Era of Autonomous Driving. Applied and Computational Engineering. https://doi.org/10.54254/2755-2721/51/20241158
Wang, X. (2022). An Efficient Federated Learning Optimization Algorithm on Non-Iid Data. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2640939
Wang, X., Wang, X., Huang, B., Dai, M., & Li, J. (2022a). Efficient Personalized Recommendation Based on Federated Learning With Similarity Ciphertext Calculation. Security and Communication Networks, 2022, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/8607234
Wang, X., Wang, X., Huang, B., Dai, M., & Li, J. (2022b). Efficient Personalized Recommendation Based on Federated Learning With Similarity Ciphertext Calculation. Security and Communication Networks. https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/8607234
Wang, Y. (2025). ParaBlock: Communication-Computation Parallel Block Coordinate Federated Learning for Large Language Models. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2511.19959
Wang, Y., Lu, Y., & Blankevoort, T. (2020). Differentiable Joint Pruning and Quantization for Hardware Efficiency. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2007.10463
Wang, Y., Yi, B., & Yu, K. (2022). Exploration and Research About Key Technologies Concerning Deep Learning Models Targeting Mobile Terminals. Journal of Physics Conference Series. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/2303/1/012086
Wang, Y., Zhi, J., Mei, L., & Huang, W. (2025). CSI Acquisition in Internet of Vehicle Network: Federated Edge Learning With Model Pruning and Vector Quantization. International Journal of Intelligent Systems. https://doi.org/10.1155/int/5813659
Wang, Z., Kuang, W., Xie, Y., Yao, L., Li, Y., Ding, B., & Zhou, J. (2022). FederatedScope-GNN: Towards a Unified, Comprehensive and Efficient Package for Federated Graph Learning. https://doi.org/10.1145/3534678.3539112
Wassan, S., Liudajun, Han, Y., Dongyan, H., & Pan, F. (2025a). Federated Learning and Differential Privacy: Machine Learning and Deep Learning for Biomedical Image Data Classification. Digital Health. https://doi.org/10.1177/20552076251358531
Wassan, S., Liudajun, Han, Y., Dongyan, H., & Pan, F. (2025b). Federated Learning and Differential Privacy: Machine Learning and Deep Learning for Biomedical Image Data Classification. Digital Health. https://doi.org/10.1177/20552076251358531
Wassan, S., Liudajun, Han, Y., Dongyan, H., & Pan, F. (2025c). Federated Learning and Differential Privacy: Machine Learning and Deep Learning for Biomedical Image Data Classification. Digital Health. https://doi.org/10.1177/20552076251358531
Wei, W., Liu, L., Wu, Y., Su, G., & Iyengar, A. (2021a). Gradient-Leakage Resilient Federated Learning. 797–807. https://doi.org/10.1109/icdcs51616.2021.00081
Wei, W., Liu, L., Wu, Y., Su, G., & Iyengar, A. (2021b). Gradient-Leakage Resilient Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.1109/icdcs51616.2021.00081
Wei, W., Liu, L., Wu, Y., Su, G., & Iyengar, A. (2021c). Gradient-Leakage Resilient Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.1109/icdcs51616.2021.00081
Weng, Z., Liu, K., & Zheng, Z. (2023). Cattle Face Detection Method Based on Channel Pruning YOLOv5 Network and Mobile Deployment. Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems. https://doi.org/10.3233/jifs-232213
Woubie, A., Solomon, E., & Attieh, J. (2024). Maintaining Privacy in Face Recognition Using Federated Learning Method. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2024.3373691
Wu, A., & Kwon, Y. (2023). Enhancing Recommendation Capabilities Using Multi-Head Attention-Based Federated Knowledge Distillation. Ieee Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2023.3271678
Wu, B., Shi, D., & Aguilar, J. (2025). Brain Tumors Classification in <scp>MRIs</Scp> Based on Personalized Federated Distillation Learning With Similarity‐Preserving. International Journal of Imaging Systems and Technology. https://doi.org/10.1002/ima.70046
Wu, C., Wu, F., Qi, T., Huang, Y., & Xie, X. (2022). FedCL: Federated Contrastive Learning for Privacy-Preserving Recommendation. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2204.09850
Wu, H., Xu, X., Zhang, D., Li, X., Wu, J., & Liu, Z. (2025a). CG-FedLLM: How to Compress Gradients in Federated Fine-Tuning for Large Language Models. https://doi.org/10.3233/faia251320
Wu, H., Xu, X., Zhang, D., Li, X., Wu, J., & Liu, Z. (2025b). CG-FedLLM: How to Compress Gradients in Federated Fine-Tuning for Large Language Models. https://doi.org/10.3233/faia251320
Wu, H., Zhang, D., Li, X., Xu, X., Wu, J., & Liu, Z. (2025c). DR-Encoder: Encode Low-Rank Gradients With Random Prior for Large Language Models Differentially Privately. Proceedings of the Aaai Conference on Artificial Intelligence. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v39i26.34985
Wu, J., Yuan, H., He, Y., & Zou, Z. (2014). ChordMR: A P2p-Based Job Management Scheme in Cloud. Journal of Networks. https://doi.org/10.4304/jnw.9.3.541-548
Wu, X., Liang, Z., & Wang, J. (2020). FedMed: A Federated Learning Framework for Language Modeling. Sensors. https://doi.org/10.3390/s20144048
Wu, Z., & Wang, B. (2024). A Federated Learning Scheme Based on Personalized Differential Privacy and Secret Sharing. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.3026504
Xia, D., Liu, X., Yao, Y., Yang, H., Wang, A., & Wu, H. (2025). Heterogeneous Defect Prediction Based on Robust Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.3066036
Xia, Z., Sun, A., Xu, J., Peng, Y., Ma, R., & Cheng, M. (2024). Contemporary Recommendation Systems on Big Data and Their Applications: A Survey. IEEE Access, 12, 196914–196928. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3517492
Xiang, T. (2025). FLAD: Federated Learning for LLM-based Autonomous Driving in Vehicle-Edge-Cloud Networks. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2511.09025
Xiao, G., Lin, J., & Han, S. (2023). Offsite-Tuning: Transfer Learning Without Full Model. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2302.04870
Xu, C. (2024). The Application of Federated Learning in Face Recognition: A Systematic Investigation of the Existing Frameworks. Applied and Computational Engineering. https://doi.org/10.54254/2755-2721/52/20241138
Xu, D., Du, W., & Wu, X. (2020). Removing Disparate Impact of Differentially Private Stochastic Gradient Descent on Model Accuracy. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2003.03699
Xu, J., Jin, Y., & Du, W. (2021). A Federated Data-Driven Evolutionary Algorithm for Expensive Multi/Many-Objective Optimization. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2106.12086
Xu, Z., Chu, C., & Song, S. (2024). An Effective Federated Recommendation Framework With Differential Privacy. Electronics. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics13081589
xue,  wanli, Nadeem, A., Masood, R., Hu, W., Seneviratne, A., & Jha, S. (2022). FLAP: Federated Learning With Attack and Privacy Awareness. https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.19766023.v1
Xue, X., Zhao, X., Zhang, Y., Ma, M., Bu, C., & Peng, P. (2023). Federated Transfer Learning With Consensus Knowledge Distillation for Intelligent Fault Diagnosis Under Data Privacy Preserving. Measurement Science and Technology. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6501/acf77d
XUE, Z. (2025a). Federated Learning Under the Uncertainty Principle of Machine Learning. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-7839869/v1
XUE, Z. (2025b). Federated Learning Under the Uncertainty Principle of Machine Learning. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-7839869/v1
XUE, Z. (2025c). Federated Learning Under the Uncertainty Principle of Machine Learning. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-7839869/v1
Yaghini, M., Liu, P., Boenisch, F., & Papernot, N. (2023a). Learning With Impartiality to Walk on the Pareto Frontier of Fairness, Privacy, and Utility. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2302.09183
Yaghini, M., Liu, P., Boenisch, F., & Papernot, N. (2023b). Learning With Impartiality to Walk on the Pareto Frontier of Fairness, Privacy, and Utility. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2302.09183
Yan, G. (2025a). FedSRD: Sparsify-Reconstruct-Decompose for Communication-Efficient Federated Large Language Models Fine-Tuning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2510.04601
Yan, G. (2025b). FedSRD: Sparsify-Reconstruct-Decompose for Communication-Efficient Federated Large Language Models Fine-Tuning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2510.04601
Yan, H., Huang, Z., & Zhang, C. (2023a). A Privacy-Enhanced Federated Learning Model Training Method. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2684744
Yan, H., Huang, Z., & Zhang, C. (2023b). A Privacy-Enhanced Federated Learning Model Training Method. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2684744
Yang, A., & Liu, Y. (2025). Heterogeneity-Aware Personalized Federated Neural Architecture Search. Entropy, 27(7), 759. https://doi.org/10.3390/e27070759
Yang, J. (2024). Application of Blockchain Technology in Real Estate Transactions Enhancing Security and Efficiency. Ijgem. https://doi.org/10.62051/ijgem.v3n3.14
Yang, L., Tan, B., Liu, B., Zheng, V. W., Chen, K., & Yang, Q. (2021). Practical and Secure Federated Recommendation With Personalized Masks. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2109.02464
Yang, Q., Liu, Y., Chen, T., & Tong, Y. (2019). Federated Machine Learning: Concept and Applications (arXiv:1902.04885). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1902.04885
Yang, X., Li, Q., Zhang, C., & Woodland, P. C. (2023). Knowledge Distillation From Multiple Foundation Models for End-to-End Speech Recognition. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2303.10917
Yang, X., Liu, Q., Su, R., Tang, R., Liu, Z., & He, X. (2021). AutoFT: Automatic Fine-Tune for Parameters Transfer Learning in Click-Through Rate Prediction. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2106.04873
Yang, X., & Xing, C. (2024a). Federated Medical Learning Framework Based on Blockchain and Homomorphic Encryption. Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing. https://doi.org/10.1155/2024/8138644
Yang, X., & Xing, C. (2024b). Federated Medical Learning Framework Based on Blockchain and Homomorphic Encryption. Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing. https://doi.org/10.1155/2024/8138644
Yang, Y. (2023). The Improvement of Federated Learning in Communication Efficiency. Highlights in Science Engineering and Technology. https://doi.org/10.54097/hset.v34i.5446
Yang, Y.-R., Wang, K., & Li, W.-J. (2023). FedREP: A Byzantine-Robust, Communication-Efficient and Privacy-Preserving Framework for Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2303.05206
Yang, Z., Ge, Y., Su, C., Wang, D., Zhao, X., & Ying, Y. (2023a). Fairness-Aware Differentially Private Collaborative Filtering. https://doi.org/10.1145/3543873.3587577
Yang, Z., Ge, Y., Su, C., Wang, D., Zhao, X., & Ying, Y. (2023b). Fairness-Aware Differentially Private Collaborative Filtering. https://doi.org/10.1145/3543873.3587577
Yao, D., Pan, W., Wan, Y., Jin, H., & Sun, L. (2021). FedHM: Efficient Federated Learning for Heterogeneous Models via Low-Rank Factorization. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2111.14655
Yao, W., Zhou, T., Han, Y., & Wang, X. (2025). Verifiable Secure Aggregation Scheme for Privacy Protection in Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-6090375/v1
Yaqoob, M. M., Alsulami, M., Khan, M. A., Alsadie, D., Jilani Saudagar, A. K., & Alkhathami, M. (2023). Federated Machine Learning for Skin Lesion Diagnosis: An Asynchronous and Weighted Approach. Diagnostics. https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics13111964
Yarashov, S. (2025). Efficient Training of Deep Neural Networks on Resource-Constrained Devices for Industrial Applications. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.3078229
Yashwanth, M. (2025). Prompt Estimation From Prototypes for Federated Prompt Tuning of Vision Transformers. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2510.25372
Yi, J., Wu, F., Wu, C., Liu, R., Sun, G., & Xie, X. (2021a). Efficient-FedRec: Efficient Federated Learning Framework for Privacy-Preserving News Recommendation. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2109.05446
Yi, J., Wu, F., Wu, C., Liu, R., Sun, G., & Xie, X. (2021b). Efficient-FedRec: Efficient Federated Learning Framework for Privacy-Preserving News Recommendation. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.223
Yi, J., Wu, F., Wu, C., Liu, R., Sun, G., & Xie, X. (2021c). Efficient-FedRec: Efficient Federated Learning Framework for Privacy-Preserving News Recommendation. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2109.05446
Yi, J., Wu, F., Wu, C., Liu, R., Sun, G., & Xie, X. (2021d). Efficient-FedRec: Efficient Federated Learning Framework for Privacy-Preserving News Recommendation. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2109.05446
Yi, J., Wu, F., Zhu, B., Yu, Y., Zhang, C., Sun, G., & Xie, X. (2022). UA-FedRec: Untargeted Attack on Federated News Recommendation. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2202.06701
Yu, X., Wei, Y. J., Li, P., Zhou, S., Peng, H., Sun, L., Zhu, L., & Yu, P. S. (2024). DAMe: Personalized Federated Social Event Detection With Dual Aggregation Mechanism. https://doi.org/10.1145/3627673.3679551
Yu, Y., Edelson, M., Pham, A. T., Pekar, J. E., Johnson, B., Post, K., & Kuo, T.-T. (2024). Distributed, Immutable, and Transparent Biomedical Limited Data Set Request Management on Multi-Capacity Network. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocae288
Yuan, W., Yang, C., Hung Nguyen, Q. V., Cui, L., He, T., & Yin, H. (2023). Interaction-Level Membership Inference Attack Against Federated Recommender Systems. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2301.10964
Zaki, M., Mohan, A., & Gopalan, A. (2022). Improved Pure Exploration in Linear Bandits With No-Regret Learning. https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2022/515
Zebari, G. M., & Musalhi, N. A. (2025). A Comprehensive Review of Integrating <scp>AI</Scp> and Blockchain Security: Innovations, Challenges, and Future Directions. Security and Privacy. https://doi.org/10.1002/spy2.70094
zeng,  jiaqi. (2024a). D2PDRF: A Differential Privacy Recommendation Algorithm Based on Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.3034770
zeng,  jiaqi. (2024b). D2PDRF: A Differential Privacy Recommendation Algorithm Based on Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.3034770
Zeraik Viduedo, P. H., Urquiza Candeia, V. C., Legname Martins, V. B., Destefani, A. C., & Destefani, V. C. (2024). Harnessing the Power of Ai and Machine Learning for Next-Generation Sequencing Data Analysis: A Comprehensive Review of Applications, Challenges, and Future Directions in Precision Oncology. Revista Ibero-Americana De Humanidades Ciências E Educação. https://doi.org/10.51891/rease.v10i8.15346
Zhan, Y., Haddadi, H., & Mashhadi, A. (2023). Privacy-Aware Adversarial Network in Human Mobility Prediction. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies. https://doi.org/10.56553/popets-2023-0032
Zhang, C., Long, G., Guo, H., Xiao, F., Yang, S., Liu, Z., Zhou, G., Zhang, Z., Liu, Y., & Yang, B. (2024). DONIS: Importance Sampling for Training Physics-Informed DeepONet. https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2024/603
Zhang, D., Sun, W., Zheng, Z.-A., Chen, W., & He, S. (2023). Adaptive Device Sampling and Deadline Determination for Cloud-Based Heterogeneous Federated Learning. Journal of Cloud Computing Advances Systems and Applications. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13677-023-00515-6
Zhang, H. (2026a). Beyond Similarity: Personalized Federated Recommendation With Composite Aggregation. Acm Transactions on Information Systems, 44(2), 1–28. https://doi.org/10.1145/3779442
Zhang, H. (2026b). Beyond Similarity: Personalized Federated Recommendation With Composite Aggregation. Acm Transactions on Information Systems. https://doi.org/10.1145/3779442
Zhang, H., Luo, F., Wu, J., He, X., & Li, Y. (2022). LightFR: Lightweight Federated Recommendation With Privacy-Preserving Matrix Factorization. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2206.11743
Zhang, H., Xie, H., & Lv, J. (2025). Resisting Against Targeted Poisoning Attacks in Lightweight Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-6658077/v1
Zhang, J., Hu, X., Cai, Z., Zhu, L., & Feng, Y. (2023). Federated Learning Based on Mutual Information Clustering for Wireless Traffic Prediction. Electronics. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics12214476
Zhang, J., Lei, F., & Fan, X. (2025). Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning for Individual Tree Crown Detection and Species Classification Using UAV-Acquired Imagery. Remote Sensing. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs17071272
Zhang, J., Xiao, X., Huang, L.-K., Rong, Y., & Bian, Y. (2022). Fine-Tuning Graph Neural Networks via Graph Topology Induced Optimal Transport. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2203.10453
Zhang, L., Duan, B., Li, J., Ma, Z., & Cao, X. (2024). A TEE-Based Federated Privacy Protection Method: Proposal and Implementation. Applied Sciences. https://doi.org/10.3390/app14083533
Zhang, M., Ma, J., Zhang, Z., & Zhou, F. (2025). FedeAMR-CFF: A Federated Automatic Modulation Recognition Method Based on Characteristic Feature Fine-Tuning. Sensors. https://doi.org/10.3390/s25134000
Zhang, P., & Kamel Boulos, M. N. (2022). Privacy-by-Design Environments for Large-Scale Health Research and Federated Learning From Data. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph191911876
Zhang, P., & Liu, P. (2025). Federated Learning With Differential Privacy Based on Summary Statistics. Engineering Reports. https://doi.org/10.1002/eng2.70429
Zhang, S., Gong, Z., Zhang, Z., & Wang, Y. (2025). <scp>APVFGL</Scp>: A Robust Vertical Federated Graph Learning Framework Against Poisoning Attacks. Concurrency and Computation Practice and Experience. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpe.70323
Zhang, S., Ren, F., Liang, W., Li, K., & Pathan, A. K. (2025). VSAF: Verifiable and Secure Aggregation Scheme for Federated Learning in Edge Computing. Computer Science and Information Systems, (00), 57–57. https://doi.org/10.2298/csis250221057z
Zhang, S., Yao, L., Sun, A., & Tay, Y. (2020). Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives. ACM Computing Surveys, 52(1), 1–38. https://doi.org/10.1145/3285029
Zhang, S., & Yin, H. (2022a). Comprehensive Privacy Analysis on Federated Recommender System Against Attribute Inference Attacks. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2205.11857
Zhang, S., & Yin, H. (2022b). Comprehensive Privacy Analysis on Federated Recommender System Against Attribute Inference Attacks. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2205.11857
Zhang, W., Qiu, Y., Bai, S., Zhang, R., Wei, X., & Bai, X. (2020). FedOCR: Communication-Efficient Federated Learning for Scene Text Recognition. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2007.11462
Zhang, X., Gu, H., Fan, L., Chen, K., & Yang, Q. (2022). No Free Lunch Theorem for Security and Utility in Federated Learning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2203.05816
Zhang, X., Wang, C., Liu, R., & Yang, S. (2024). Federated RNN-Based Detection of Ransomware Attacks: A Privacy-Preserving Approach. https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/szjkw
Zhang, X., Zhang, Q., & Liming, J. (2025). Layer‐Level Adaptive Gradient Perturbation Protecting Deep Learning Based on Differential Privacy. Caai Transactions on Intelligence Technology. https://doi.org/10.1049/cit2.70008
Zhang, X., Zhou, T., Wei, K., Guo, Z., & Yang, X. (2025). An Efficient Collusion-Resistant and Drop-Proof Federated Learning Security Aggregation Scheme Based on RLWE. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-7093115/v1
Zhang, Y. (2025). Privacy-Preserving Continuous Medical Data Stream Analysis With Contextual Pattern Awareness. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.3092511
Zhang, Y., Ai, X., He, Q., Zhang, X., Dou, W., Chen, F., Chen, L., & Yang, Y. (2017). Personalized Quality Centric Service Recommendation. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69035-3_39
Zhang, Y., Zhang, Z., Li, J., Shao, S., & Guo, S. (2013). Test Process and Correction of Automotive Wind Tunnel in Jilin University China. https://doi.org/10.4271/2013-01-1351
Zhang, Z., Liu, Q., Huang, Z., Wang, H., Lee, C., & Chen, E. (2022). Model Inversion Attacks Against Graph Neural Networks. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2209.07807
Zhang, Z., Wang, H., Chen, J., Fan, Z., Song, X., & Shibasaki, R. (2022). GOF-TTE: Generative Online Federated Learning Framework for Travel Time Estimation. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2207.00838
Zhang, Z., Yang, Y., Dai, Y., Wang, Q., Yu, Y., Qu, L., & Xu, Z. (2023). FedPETuning: When Federated Learning Meets the Parameter-Efficient Tuning Methods of Pre-Trained Language Models. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.632
Zhao, B., Liu, X., & Chen, W. (2021). When Crowdsensing Meets Federated Learning: Privacy-Preserving Mobile Crowdsensing System. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2102.10109
Zhao, B., Mopuri, K. R., & Bilen, H. (2020). iDLG: Improved Deep Leakage from Gradients (arXiv:2001.02610). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2001.02610
Zhao, J. (2023). Privacy-Preserving Fine-Tuning of Artificial Intelligence (AI) Foundation Models With Federated Learning, Differential Privacy, Offsite Tuning, and Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT). https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.24191886
Zhao, J., Mao, K., Huang, C., & Zeng, Y. (2021). Utility Optimization of Federated Learning With Differential Privacy. Discrete Dynamics in Nature and Society. https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/3344862
Zhao, R., Lu, J., Liu, Z., Wang, T., Guo, W., Lan, T., & Hu, C. (2024a). A Federated-Learning Algorithm Based on Client Sampling and Gradient Projection for the Smart Grid. Electronics. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics13112023
Zhao, R., Lu, J., Liu, Z., Wang, T., Guo, W., Lan, T., & Hu, C. (2024b). A Federated-Learning Algorithm Based on Client Sampling and Gradient Projection for the Smart Grid. Electronics. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics13112023
Zhao, S., Shu-hua, X., Han, S., Ren, S., Wang, Y., Chen, Z., Chen, X., Lin, J., & Liu, W. (2024). PPMM-DA: Privacy-Preserving Multidimensional and Multisubset Data Aggregation With Differential Privacy for Fog-Based Smart Grids. Ieee Internet of Things Journal. https://doi.org/10.1109/jiot.2023.3309132
Zhao, Y., Li, M., Lai, L., Suda, N., Civin, D., & Chandra, V. (2018). Federated Learning with Non-IID Data. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1806.00582
Zhao, Z., Kunar, A., Birke, R., der Scheer, H. V., & Chen, L. Y. (2024). CTAB-GAN+: Enhancing Tabular Data Synthesis. Frontiers in Big Data. https://doi.org/10.3389/fdata.2023.1296508
Zhao, Z., Ma, Y., Xu, K., & Wan, J. (2023). Deep Hybrid Compression Network for Lidar Point Cloud Classification and Segmentation. Remote Sensing. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs15164015
Zheng, B., Wu, D., Fan, J., & Du, K. (2024). Fault Diagnosis of Rolling Bearing Based on Adaptive Attention Network and Federated Learning. Measurement Science and Technology. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6501/ad69b5
Zheng, J., Xu, J., Du, H., Niyato, D., Kang, J., Nie, J., & Wang, Z. (2024). Trust Management of Tiny Federated Learning in Internet of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 11(12), 21046–21060. https://doi.org/10.1109/jiot.2024.3363443
Zheng, Q., Chen, S., Long, Q., & Su, W. (2021). Federated F-Differential Privacy. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2102.11158
Zhou, A., Jiang, N., & Tang, T. (2024). Asynchronous Robust Aggregation Method With Privacy Protection for IoV Federated Learning. World Electric Vehicle Journal. https://doi.org/10.3390/wevj15010018
Zhou, G. (2025). Privacy Optimization Method for Federated Learning Based on Evolutionary Game Theory. Aip Advances. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0302915
Zhou, Q. (2024a). PPBRFL: Privacy-Preserving Byzantine-Robust Federated Learning. Frontiers in Computing and Intelligent Systems. https://doi.org/10.54097/6jamgy43
Zhou, Q. (2024b). PPBRFL: Privacy-Preserving Byzantine-Robust Federated Learning. Frontiers in Computing and Intelligent Systems. https://doi.org/10.54097/6jamgy43
Zhou, X. (2025). Privacy Protection Optimization in Federated Learning. Itm Web of Conferences. https://doi.org/10.1051/itmconf/20257804003
Zhu, H. (2020). On the relationship between (secure) multi-party computation and (secure) federated learning (arXiv:2008.02609). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2008.02609
Zhu, L., Liu, Z., & Han, S. (2019a). Deep Leakage from Gradients (arXiv:1906.08935). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1906.08935
Zhu, L., Liu, Z., & Han, S. (2019b). Deep Leakage from Gradients (arXiv:1906.08935). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1906.08935
Zhu, Y. (2025a). Personalised Recommendation With Federated Lightweight Graph Convolutional Networks. Expert Systems. https://doi.org/10.1111/exsy.70173
Zhu, Y. (2025b). Personalised Recommendation With Federated Lightweight Graph Convolutional Networks. Expert Systems. https://doi.org/10.1111/exsy.70173
Zhu, Y. (2025c). Personalised Recommendation With Federated Lightweight Graph Convolutional Networks. Expert Systems. https://doi.org/10.1111/exsy.70173
Zhu, Z., Si, S., Wang, J., & Xiao, J. (2022a). Cali3F: Calibrated Fast Fair Federated Recommendation System. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2205.13121
Zhu, Z., Si, S., Wang, J., & Xiao, J. (2022b). Cali3F: Calibrated Fast Fair Federated Recommendation System. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2205.13121
Zizzo, G., Rawat, A., Sinn, M., & Buesser, B. (2020). FAT: Federated Adversarial Training. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2012.01791
Кушнарьов, М. О. (2025). Методи Машинного Навчання В Інтелектуальних Системах «розумний Будинок»: Класифікація, Проблеми Та Перспективи. Open Information and Computer Integrated Technologies. https://doi.org/10.32620/oikit.2025.105.19

Appendix
Deep Leakage
It is a specific type of attack where the adversary can reverse engineer the original data just by looking at the series of gradient in the Federated learning system. Since the gradient have one vector of improving the error, the attacker knows in which direction to move so that the original data can be fetched.
The normal machine learning works by first fixing the data point and update the weights to minimise error in Deep leakage attack. The attacker fixes the weights and gradient and then works back by updating the dummy data to match the gradient. 
In a neural network, the gradient with respect to the weights  is calculated by multiplying terms all the way back from the output to the input.
As an example, let’s see if we have a picture containing lots of pixels and we are to encode it with gradient algorithm, then it is to be noted that every pixel in the input influences the final gradient value. Therefore, we can conclude that the gradient codes, the pixel values.
Since every value in the chain of the chain rule is deterministic and perfect, leading to the initial input values. The only way to break this chain is to add some perturbation, or we can say noise to at least one of the values in between the chain rule.

The adversary is trying to track the original value using the chain rule in reverse. He will be encountered with this noise. This noise will prevent their anniversary from going into the right path back to the input in a sense, they are chasing a ghost. The mathematical mirror, which was helping the adversary to track back. The whole input value is no shattered, and he will be led to an image, which is meaningless or at least blurry in a worst case scenario.
RSA (Rivest-Shavir-Aldeman)
Here is how the RSA algorithm works :
Choose two distinct, large random prime numbers  and .
Compute the modulus 

Compute the totient :

Choose the integer  (the public exponent) such that  and . Commonly, 
Determine  (the private exponent) as the modular multiplicative inverse of :

Public Key: 
Private Key: 
Encryption:

Decryption:

Oblivious Transfer Protocol
In simple words, it is a “magic trick” that allows two people (an analogy) to share information while keeping their specific choices and secrets hidden from each other. It is a fundamental building block for almost all privacy preserving technologies today. 
The Scenario
Take an example of two persons Alice and Bob. The sender in this case will be Alice and the recipient is Bob. Alice produces two envelopes one labelled zero and another one labelled the one and writes them down. Each envelope has a secret message which she writes as we shall call it Message 0 and Message 1 respectively. These messages are supposed to be confidential and one message over an envelope should be unique and the content of the mail should not be mixed and copied.
And now he, Bob, would give you the secret he wants, secret in one envelope, envelope number one, to be more precise. but he, time stands in a dilemma, he wants to see what the envelope number one contains, he wants to do what he got not, tell Alice his choice. Precisely, Bob does not want to know anything other than what is in envelope one and does want to ensure that on his part there is as little information as possible at the mind of Alice as to the envelope chosen by Bob. It is a crucial necessity in which the privacy and secrecy of choice is essential and has some cryptographic protocols or secure voting systems.
On the other hand Alice too is concerned with privacy of her messages. She is collaborative to allow Bob a moment in order to read the only one of the two secret messages namely 0 and 1 than to not both of them. She does not want Bob to know whatever was in the other envelope whatever envelope he chooses. This would ensure that information that would otherwise be spread would be kept secret and there is no message that is left to flow into the hands of Bob than there is regarding his liking.
This kind of setup will give a delicate balance: Bob will not want to be discovered by Alice, and vice versa, neither is willing to make sure that Bob is only aware of one secret and is never allowed to utilize the other. It is not that straightforward and it is a special form of a protocol with a magic graciousness, allowing Bob to choose and learn privately one and only one message and for certain the choice that will be made in Alice will not be learned privately and the same message will not be learned either. This is the basic challenge that have made the Oblivious Transfer Protocol to be developed as has been explained below. Superior privacy protective technologies and secret multi-party procedures in the digital domain are based on such protocols.
The Problem
If Bob requests envelope one then Alice knows his decision. If Alice sends them, both envelopes, then Bob will read both the messages. Hence in both of these case of the encryption the point of encryption is killed.
To elaborate, this scenario, brings two concern for privacy in a naive way of sharing secrets. Firstly if Bob asks Alice directly envelope one it is immediately obvious to Alice what message Bob is interested in. This eliminates the demand of privacy on the recipient, since his option is not hidden anymore from the sender. Bob's intention should be not public, it's prefer to him to communicate directly and the preference will be shown.
Secondly if Alice chooses to send both envelopes to Bob so that she does not know which he has chosen then unwittingly she gives Bob read access to both messages. This is violation to the privacy of the sender because Bob can now read both secrets and this is against the point of selective sharing. The basic issue in this is that either the individual sending the message knows what the receiver is slated to choose or the receiver finds out about all the secrets - in both the cases the fundamental principles behind encryption and privacy loses its meaning.
Therefore, a safe protocol is required where Bob is able to receive the only message (recieved) without the other message being exposed to Alice, and to Bob. This is the exact challenge that Oblivious Transfer Protocol is most designed to solve and ensure the privacy for both parties and doesn't leak out more information than it is meant to.
The Protocol of Oblivious Transfer
The Nadi Oblivious Transfer Protocol is a somewhat complex piece of mathematics, which is referred to as the public-key cryptography but the general logic of the process can be simply stated. We shall deconstruct and provide a description of each stage through basic analogy.
The Set-up: Suppose that Alice assembles two types of digital locks (you can imagine them to be very secure padlocks), and she puts them on a table. She also possesses a master key which can unlock the two locks but most significantly she keeps the master key and so there should be no need to hand it over to Bob. That which Alice wants to guard, are these two locks, the two possible secrets or messages (Message 0 and Message 1) that Alice wants to ensure safety over.
The Blinded Choice: Now, Bob decides what secret to wish he could see, Lock 1 (say) in specific. however, he does not want Alice to know what was this very lock. In order to conceal his choice, he makes a special computational effort to cover the lock with blindness, he is able to fantasize that he can strip vegan lock or any substance on a lock of the door so that Alice would not know that he has picked the vegan lock. Then he uncovers this indolent eye (or symbol of his indolent decision) to Alice. This way, Alice is aware whether he is on the number Lock 0 or Lock 1.
The Double Encryption: Alice gets signal by Bob/Blinded lock Because it is blind, Alice no means of telling what lock Bob is interested in. After this she transmits Message 0 and ciphers with the logic of Lock 0 only Lock 0 can decrypt and ciphers with the logic of Lock 1 Message 1. Then she can send back the two encrypted messages (the one encrypted using Lock 0 and one encrypted using Lock 1) to Bob.
The Reveal: Bob has now been given the encrypted / locked messages. This implies that, courtesy of the entirely insane calculation he has made in the past (the blinding), he has the key logic of the lock to which he is interested, (viz., Lock 1). By this, he is able to pass the opening and reading of Message 1. When trying to open Message 0 though, it is not able to do so, the calculation is not working, the decryption is not working and he can only see gibberish or other non-sensible information. Bob then goes to take his message and not that of the other.
In summary, it is a protocol like a magic trick of digital locks and keys -bob is free to unlock any of the messages that he is not aware on which message he will unlock Alice and, after that, he is not able to unlock the other message. At the same time that the other half of the secret that Alice possesses has been preserved and she will never discover what message Bob was curious of. This comes with privacy to the receiver and message sender that is highly vital to cryptography and secure systems.
Shamir’s Secret Sharing
Now let's say we have a nuclear code or some kind of top secret code, That has to be kept safe in all cost. One solution is that we handover the code to one person who will keep it secret. But this solution is not very efficient, because if something happens to that person or if the person dies, the secret goes with him and the code is lost forever. Another solution is that sharing that same secret key with someone else. This creates a problem that upon sharing the secret, The risk of the secret getting known to the public gets doubled. Similarly, if we share the secret with number of people, The risk gets even bigger by that factor. So in other words, none of the above presented solutions work.
There is another solution. The key has to be. Divided among n number of trusted people. Now remember that these people are trusted and these people. Have a very low risk of Revealing the secret to the public. Also, none of the members of the group know the complete secret, so the secret remains secret. However, this solution is also not efficient. Because when it's time to reveal the secret, every one of the member has to be present at the same time. So if someone gets sick or if someone is busy somewhere and is not able to attend the meeting, the secret remains hidden.
This is where Shamir's secret sharing scheme comes to play. We want to distribute shares to people, such that any group of people can combine their shares to reveal the secret, but any group smaller than learns absolutely nothing. This scheme can be compared with privacy, in which one or 2 absence of data does not make much effect in the whole result of the system. So if at least number of people are present at the meeting, then number of people will have almost same result when all the shares are combined to reveal the secret. 

Step 1: The Dealer Constructs a Polynomial
The "Dealer" (the entity creating the shares) builds a random polynomial  of degree .
The polynomial looks like this:

Here is the breakdown of the components:
The Constant Term (  ): This is the secret. Notice that if we plug in , all the  terms disappear, and we are left with . Geometrically, the secret is the y-intercept of the graph.
The Coefficients  : These are random numbers chosen by the Dealer. They serve to "scramble" the graph.
The Degree (  ): This determines the security threshold. If you want to require 3 people to unlock the secret, you need , so you choose degree .
Step 2: Distributing the Shares
The Dealer generates shares for the participants. A "share" is simply a point on this curve.
The Dealer calculates .
Participant 1 gets the pair .
Participant 2 gets the pair .
Participant  gets the pair .
The Dealer then deletes the polynomial and the coefficients. They no longer exist anywhere in memory.
Step 3: Reconstruction
Years later, the participants want to recover the secret. Suppose the threshold is , and participants 1,3 , and 5 meet up. They pool their shares:



Because they have  points, they can mathematically reconstruct the unique polynomial  that passes through these points. Once they have the equation for , they simply calculate  to get the secret .
The reconstruction of the polynomial takes place via Lagrange Interpolation
Shamir's Secret Sharing is the gold standard for distributing trust because it offers Information-Theoretic Security (means protected by the laws of mathematics and probability). This means it is unbreakable even with infinite computing power, provided the attackers have fewer than the required threshold of shares.
Lagrange Interpolation 
Given  points , the reconstruction formula is:

Where  are the Lagrange basis polynomials:

The basis polynomial  is designed to be exactly 1 at  and 0 at all other . When we sum them up, the curve perfectly hits every data point.
Since we only care about the secret  (which is  ), we don't need to solve for the whole curve. We just evaluate the formula at  :


FedSlate
FedSlate is a cutting-edge framework that integrates Federated Learning (FL) with Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) to build privacy-preserving, long-term optimized recommender systems. Specifically, it addresses the challenge of recommending "slates"-lists of items (e.g., a YouTube homepage, a Netflix row)—rather than single items, while keeping user data decentralized on local devices.
The algorithm is designed to solve two critical problems in modern recommendation:
Privacy: Traditional recommender systems require uploading sensitive user interaction logs to a central server. FedSlate keeps raw data on the user's device.
Long-term Engagement: Traditional systems often optimize for immediate clicks (myopic). FedSlate uses Reinforcement Learning (specifically SlateQ) to optimize for long-term user satisfaction and retention.
1. Theoretical Foundation
To understand FedSlate, one must first grasp the intersection of the two domains it bridges: the Slate Recommendation problem modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), and the Federated Learning paradigm.

1.1 The Slate Recommendation Problem
In real-world scenarios, systems recommend a slate (a collection of  items) rather than a single item. The user observes the slate and selects one item (or none). This selection influences the user's future state (e.g., boredom, interest shift).
We model this as an MDP defined by the tuple  :
State (  ): The user's current profile, history, and context at time .
Action  : The slate of items recommended by the system. Note that the action space is combinatorial (all possible subsets of items), which is massive.
User Choice: The user selects an item  with probability .
Reward (  ): The immediate feedback (e.g., click, watch time) received from the user's selection.
Transition: The state updates to  based on the interaction.

1.2 The Challenge of Combinatorial Action Space
Standard Q-learning attempts to learn a value function  representing the expected long-term reward of choosing action  in state . However, because  is a slate of items, the number of possible actions is , where  is the total item catalog size. This is too large to learn directly.
FedSlate leverages the SlateQ decomposition technique to solve this. SlateQ assumes the Long-Term Value (LTV) of a slate depends on the item the user actually consumes.

Here,  is the item-level Q-value: the expected long-term return if the user is presented with a slate containing item  and actually chooses item . This decomposition reduces the learning problem from the slate space to the item space.
2. Fed Slate Architecture
FedSlate operates on a client-server architecture typical of Federated Learning but adapted for RL training dynamics.

3. Fed-Slate Algorithm
The algorithm proceeds in communication rounds. Let  be the total rounds and  be the number of clients selected per round.
Step 1: Initialization
The central server initializes the global item-wise Q-network parameters . This network takes a state  and an item  (or item embedding) and outputs .
Step 2: Local Interaction (On Device)
Each client interacts with the recommendation engine.
State Observation: The device constructs state  from local logs.
Slate Generation: The client generates a slate  that maximizes the Q-value:

(Note: Greedy selection or -greedy is used here).
User Feedback: The user picks item  (or no item). A reward  is observed.
Storage: The transition  is stored in the device's private Replay Buffer.
Step 3: Local Model Update (The SlateQ Loss)
When selected for training, a client performs gradient descent steps on their local data. The critical innovation is how the target value is calculated using the SlateQ decomposition.
For a sampled batch of transitions, the loss function  is minimized:

Where the Target Value  is defined by the Bellman equation for slates:

Interpretation: The algorithm updates the value of the chosen item (i) to match the immediate reward plus the discounted value of the best possible slate available in the next state .
 represents the parameters of a target network (standard in DQN to stabilize training).
Step 4: Federated Aggregation
After local training, clients send their model updates (e.g.,  ) to the server. The server aggregates these using FedAvg:

Where  is the number of samples on client , and  is the server learning rate.
Model Inversion
Model and version is also a class of attack in Federated learning that specifically works on  privacy. In this attacks, the adversary climbs up all the  gradients that were introduced to the data in order to hide the original data points. Since gradients work on chain rule of calculus, assuming no noise has been added yet, the chain rule can be worked back from the final gradient to the original data, and this kills the whole point of privacy.
In other words, model in version only needs output scores from the deployed API. With more advanced attacks like deep leakage, the attacker, instead of simply guessing the input data from output, actually reverse engineers by “climbing” up the ladder of all the gradients in each and every level and reaches the top where the original data lies.
To understand how inversion is possible, we must look at the calculus of neural network training.
In a standard FL setting (e.g., using FedAvg), a client  holds a private dataset . The client computes the gradient of a loss function  with respect to the model parameters .
The gradient vector  sent to the server is:

Consider a simple single-neuron layer (perceptron) where the output is  and the loss is derived from this output. By the chain rule of calculus, the gradient with respect to the weights is:

Notice the direct multiplicative relationship. The gradient  is directly proportional to the input data . In a fully connected layer, the gradient of the weights connecting to the input is simply the error term scaled by the input features.

The Optimization
Assume the adversary (server) receives a gradient  from a victim client. The adversary wants to find the data pair  that generated this gradient.
The adversary initializes "dummy" data  (e.g., random noise) and a dummy label . They feed this dummy data into the current model  to compute a "dummy gradient"  :

The goal is to make  match . We define a distance function (cost function), typically the Euclidean distance (  norm) or Cosine Similarity:

The Reconstruction
The adversary optimizes the dummy data  to minimize this cost. Note that we are not updating the model weights  (as in normal training); we are updating the input pixels .
The update rule for the reconstruction is:

Where:
 is the reconstructed image at step .
 is the reconstruction learning rate.
The term  requires computing the "gradient of the gradient" (second-order derivative), which is computationally expensive but feasible for modern autograd libraries (like PyTorch or TensorFlow).
Rényi Differential Privacy
To understand Rényi  Privacy (RDP), we must first identify the friction point in standard  Privacy (DP) that necessitated its creation.
Standard ϵ-DP is a worst-case guarantee. It demands that for any possible output, the probability ratio between two neighboring datasets is strictly bounded. This is like designing a bridge assuming every single car is an overweight semi-truck. It is safe, but it is incredibly inefficient-especially when we perform the same operation thousands of times (like in training machine learning models).
The core insight of RDP is this: Instead of bounding the worst-case privacy leak, we should bound the "moments" (the average behavior of the higher powers) of the privacy leak.
This shift allows us to ignore highly improbable "catastrophic" leaks that ruin standard DP bounds, resulting in a much tighter analysis of how privacy degrades over repeated queries.
The Core Object: The Privacy Loss Random Variable
To understand RDP, we must visualize the "Privacy Loss" not as a single number, but as a shifting, random value.
Imagine two parallel universes:
Universe P: The database contains your data. (Distribution  )
Universe Q: The database does not contain your data. (Distribution  )
An attacker sees an output  (e.g., a statistic or a model weight) and tries to guess which universe they are in. The "evidence" they gain is the log-likelihood ratio, which we call the Privacy Loss Random Variable, denoted as  :

If , then . The attacker learns nothing.
If , then  is large and positive. The output  is a "fingerprint" that strongly suggests your data is present.
The Difference in Perspective Standard -DP looks at the tail of this variable. It asks: "Does  ever exceed  ?" It requires that the probability of  is very small (at most  ). It treats the privacy loss as a cliff: stay safe on the plateau, and don't fall off.
Rényi DP looks at the shape of . It asks: "What is the expectation of the exponential of  ?"
Specifically, it looks at the moments of the likelihood ratio. By constraining these moments, RDP ensures that while  might get large, the probability of it doing so drops off incredibly fast-exponentially fast.

The Mathematical Engine: Rényi Divergence
RDP quantifies the difference between Universe P and Universe Q using Rényi Divergence.
While Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence measures the average information gain (expected value of  ), Rényi divergence is a parameterized family of divergences that allows us to weigh "outliers" more heavily.
For a parameter , the Rényi Divergence  is defined as:

The Role of Alpha (  ) Think of  as a "magnifying glass" for bad events.
 : This converges to KL divergence. It measures the average privacy loss. This is often too weak for privacy guarantees because averages hide disasters.
 : This converges to the "max divergence," which is essentially pure -DP. It focuses entirely on the worst-case outcome.
Finite  (e.g., 2, 5, 20): This is the sweet spot. It penalizes high privacy loss outcomes polynomially more than low ones, but it doesn't panic over a single worst-case point like  does.
Definition of RDP: A mechanism satisfies -RDP if for all neighboring datasets  :

The "Click": Why RDP Wins at Composition
The true power of RDP-and the reason it is the standard for training Large Language Models and Deep Learning—is Composition.
In Deep Learning, we add noise to gradients thousands of times (Stochastic Gradient Descent). We need to know the total privacy loss after  steps.
The Failure of Standard DP: If you have a mechanism that is -DP, and you run it  times, standard analysis says the total privacy loss is . This is the "worst-case" assumption: it assumes the attacker gets lucky and sees the worst-case output every single time.
The RDP Insight: RDP behaves like variance. If you add independent random variables, their variances add up linearly.
Because RDP is based on the cumulant generating function (log-moment generating function) of the privacy loss, it composes linearly:
If mechanism  is -RDP and  is -RDP, then running both is: -RDP
Because the  in RDP is usually much smaller for the same amount of noise, specifically when dealing with Gaussian noise.
When we convert RDP back to standard -DP at the end of the process, the "Central Limit Theorem" effect kicks in. The total privacy loss doesn't grow linearly with ; it grows roughly with .

The Gaussian Mechanism Connection
This is where the theory becomes practical. RDP is naturally suited for the Gaussian Mechanism (adding noise from a normal distribution).
If we add Gaussian noise with variance  to a function with sensitivity 1 :
Standard DP Analysis: Messy. Requires complex approximation to get tight bounds.
RDP Analysis: Exact and simple.
The RDP of the Gaussian mechanism is exactly:

Notice the linearity in . This simple formula allows us to track the privacy loss analytically through thousands of training steps. We simply sum up the  terms.
Converting Back to Reality
We don't usually report "Rényi Divergence" to the public; we report  is an intermediate accounting tool.
Once we have finished our  steps and calculated the total RDP , we convert it back to -DP using a tail bound (Markov's inequality applied to moments).
The conversion formula is roughly:

The Optimization Trick: Since this holds for any , we can compute the RDP for many different  values simultaneously during training. At the very end, we choose the specific  that minimizes  for our target .
Dirichlet Data Partitioning
The field of machine, learning, especially federated learning, the performance of algorithms depend upon how the data is distributed and partitioned among many different users. Because there are various types of users, generating various types of data, the data is very rarely evenly distributed or randomly distributed. So to test the algorithms despite of the heterogeneity of the data, researchers use what is called Dirichlet Data Partitioning.
The Dirichlet Distribution
The core of this method is the Dirichlet distribution, denoted as . It is a multivariate probability distribution parameterized by a vector  of positive reals. It is often referred to as a "distribution over distributions."
2.1 Definition
Let  be a random vector where each  and . The vector  lies on the -dimensional simplex. The probability density function (PDF) of the Dirichlet distribution is:

Where:
 is the number of categories (or clients, depending on application).
 is the concentration parameter vector.
 is the multivariate Beta function, which serves as a normalization constant:

(Here,  denotes the Gamma function).
2.2 The Concentration Parameter (  )
In the context of data partitioning, we usually set a symmetric concentration parameter, meaning all elements of the vector are equal: . We refer to this scalar simply as .
This parameter  controls the sparsity of the sampled vectors:
 : The distribution concentrates at the center of the simplex. Sampled vectors are close to uniform .
 : The distribution is uniform over the simplex. Any valid probability vector is equally likely.
 : The distribution concentrates at the corners (vertices) of the simplex. Sampled vectors are sparse (e.g., close to one-hot vectors like  ).

The Partitioning Algorithm
Let us assume we have a dataset with  classes (e.g., for CIFAR-10,  ) and we want to distribute it among  clients. The standard approach (often called "Label Distribution Skew") partitions the data such that the proportion of instances of class  allocated to client , denoted , follows a Dirichlet distribution.
Step-by-Step Procedure
Organize Data by Class:
Separate the global dataset into  buckets, one for each class label .
2. Sample Proportions for Each Class:
For each class , we want to decide how to distribute its examples across the  clients. We sample a vector  from the Dirichlet distribution: vector of length 
Here,  where .
 represents the fraction of all class  examples that will be assigned to client .
Assign Indices:
If class  has  total examples in the global dataset:
Client 1 receives  examples.
Client 2 receives  examples.
...and so on.
(Note: In practice, we round these to the nearest integer).
Repeat for All Classes:
Perform this sampling independently for every class . Because the sampling is independent, Client 1 might get a huge chunk of Class 0 (if  is high) but almost none of Class 1 (if  is low).
The scalar  acts as the heterogeneity knob.
Extreme Heterogeneity (  ). When  is small (e.g., 0.1 or 0.5 ), the Dirichlet distribution pushes probability mass to the edges.
Result: For a specific class , the vector  will likely have one or two large values and many values near zero.
Interpretation: Class  is found almost exclusively on one or two clients. Client  might possess data for only 2 out of 10 classes. This is a difficult setting for Federated Learning because the local objective functions of the clients are very different from the global objective.
Moderate Heterogeneity (  ) The proportions are random but cover the simplex.
Result: Clients have varying amounts of each class, but usually have some representation of most classes.
IID Setting 
When is large (e.g., 100 or 1000 ), the distribution converges to the mean.
Result: .
Interpretation: Every client gets roughly the same amount of every class. This effectively reconstructs a random shuffle (IID).


Multi-Objective Optimization
In a standard machine learning problem, we optimize a scalar value (the loss). In the FL+DP context, we are optimizing a vector of functions. We want to minimize the error while simultaneously minimizing the privacy loss (or maximizing the privacy budget tightness).
We define the vector of objectives  :

Because these objectives conflict (improving privacy hurts error), there is no single "best" solution. Instead, we look for Pareto Optimal solutions.
A solution  is Pareto optimal if there is no other solution  such that  is better than  in all objectives. The set of all such optimal trade-offs forms the Pareto Front.
Heterogeneity as an MOO Problem
In Federated Learning, MOO is not just about Privacy vs. Accuracy. It is often about Client Fairness.
If Client A has clean data and Client B has noisy data, a single global model might work well for A but fail for B .
We can reformulate the FL problem as minimizing the worst-case loss among all clients:

Or treating each client's loss as a separate objective in the MOO vector:

Adding  Privacy adds yet another dimension to this vector, as different clients may have different privacy preferences.
Solving the MOO Problem in FL+DP
Scalarization (Linearization)
The simplest approach is to convert the vector problem back into a scalar problem by assigning weights  to each objective.

In the context of DP, this often manifests as a constrained optimization problem:  subject to 
This is usually solved using Lagrange multipliers. The "price" of privacy becomes a regularization term. However, finding the correct  is difficult and requires extensive tuning.

Gradient-Based MOO (MGDA)
A more advanced method uses the Multiple Gradient Descent Algorithm (MGDA). This method looks at the gradients of the conflicting objectives and attempts to find a direction that improves all of them (or at least improves one without hurting the others).
Let  be the gradient of the loss and  be the gradient of the privacy penalty (or the gradient of a specific client's loss).
If the angle between  and  is less than , we can step in the average direction to improve both.
If the angle is greater than , the objectives conflict. Moving down  increases .
MGDA computes a direction  that is the minimum norm element in the convex hull of the gradients. This ensures the model converges to a Pareto stationary point.

Advanced Application: Personalized Differential Privacy
One of the most powerful applications of MOO in this field is Personalized  Privacy.
In a standard setting, every client gets the same privacy budget . However, some users might be less sensitive about their data than others.
User A: "I don't care who sees my data." (Low privacy requirement, contributes high utility).
User B: "My data is highly sensitive." (High privacy requirement, contributes noise).
If we force User A to have high privacy, we waste their potential to improve the model. If we force User B to have low privacy, we violate their trust.
We treat this as a Multi-Objective problem where we optimize the global accuracy while satisfying a vector of privacy constraints .
The optimization finds a model  such that:

This allows the system to extract more "signal" from less privacy-sensitive users while strictly protecting the sensitive ones, pushing the Pareto front of the global model further into the high-accuracy/high-privacy zone.
Poisson Subsampling
In the world of machine learning today, there are two vital limitations that are often in conflict with each other: to be able to train machine learning models on huge and distributed data sets and to protect the privacy of people whose data is being circulated around. Federated Learning (FL) addresses the distributed nature of data by decentralizing the process of training data on the devices, and the term  Privacy (DP) represents a powerful mathematical tool to quantify and limit the level of data-leakage to privacy.
Poisson Subsampling is an important connecting link between these two fields. It is a method of randomized sampling, when used to select the participants or bits of data in an algorithm, which drastically increases the privacy guarantees of the system. This phenomenon is referred to as privacy amplification.
In the light of FL, Poisson subsampling transforms the client selection procedure from deterministic or fixed size procedure to probabilistic ensuring that there is less statistical dependency of the global model on an individual user data.
Mathematical Definition
Let  be a dataset (or a set of clients in FL) of size .
In Poisson Subsampling, a subset  is constructed by making an independent binary decision for each element .
For a sampling probability , each element is included in the sample  according to a Bernoulli trial:

This decision is independent for all .
Properties
Variable Sample Size: Unlike fixed-batch sampling where , in Poisson subsampling, the sample size  is a random variable following a Binomial distribution:
The expected sample size is .

Independence: The inclusion of client  does not influence the probability of including client . This independence is mathematically vital for simplifying the composition analysis in  Privacy.

Matthew Effect
The Matthew Effect arises because the "cost" of privacy (the noise and clipping) is not paid equally by all classes. It is determined by the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR).

The Catalyst: Differential Privacy
To prevent the server or an adversary from reconstructing a specific user's data from their gradient update , we apply  Privacy. In the context of FL, this is typically Client-Level DP.
To satisfy DP, two operations are performed on the client's update before aggregation:
Gradient Clipping: The update  is clipped to a maximum norm  to bound the sensitivity of the aggregation function.

Noise Injection: Random noise (usually Gaussian) is added to the sum of updates.

Here,  is the noise multiplier determined by the privacy budget .
Mechanism of Matthew Effect
A. The Impact of Noise on Minority Classes
The global update is a summation of signal plus noise.

For Majority Classes: There are many clients contributing gradients pointing in the same direction. The sum of these gradients grows linearly with the number of clients (  ), while the noise variance remains constant (or grows slower than the signal). The signal overwhelms the noise.
For Minority Classes: There are very few clients contributing gradients. The sum of their gradients is small. The DP noise, which is isotropic (added equally in all directions), can easily have a magnitude larger than the minority signal.
Result: The model effectively "unlearns" or fails to learn the minority classes because their gradients are drowned out by static, whereas the majority classes remain robust.
B. The Impact of Clipping (Gradient Bias)
Gradient clipping is particularly detrimental to "hard" examples or outliers, which often correspond to minority data.
To learn a rare pattern, a model often generates a large gradient (high error implies a large update vector).
DP requires clipping this vector to norm .
This clipping introduces bias. The direction of the update is preserved, but its magnitude is crushed. When combined with noise, a clipped small vector is statistically indistinguishable from pure noise. 


Mathematical Formulation of the Disparity
We can quantify this effect by looking at the convergence bounds of ly Private Stochastic Gradient Descent (DP-SGD).
Let  be the loss function. The convergence error bound in a convex setting for DP-SGD is often expressed as:

Where:
 is the number of iterations.
 is the dimension of the model.
 is the effective sample size for the specific feature/class.
 is the noise scale.
Notice the second term (the privacy cost): .
For the Majority:  is large. The term  becomes negligible. The privacy cost is close to zero.
For the Minority:  is small. The term  is large. The privacy cost dominates the convergence bound.
This creates a feedback loop. As the model improves on the majority, the feature representations optimize for those classes. The gradients for the minority classes become even more "anomalous" (larger magnitude) relative to the majority features, leading to more aggressive clipping, further reducing their signal.
Visualizing the Divergence
The Matthew Effect is best observed by comparing the accuracy gap between groups before and after applying DP.






Codebase Structure
Table of Contents
[Code Structure](#code-structure)
[Folder Organization](#folder-organization)
[Running the Code](#running-the-code)
[Repository Information](#repository-information)
[Key Components](#key-components)
[Dependencies](#dependencies)
Code Structure
The codebase is organized into two main components:
Python Server and Client Implementation - Core federated learning infrastructure
Mobile Application (Flutter/Dart) - Android client for real device participation
Python Implementation
The Python codebase implements a client-server federated learning architecture using:
FastAPI for RESTful server endpoints
PyTorch for neural network models and training
NumPy/Pandas for data processing
Rényi  Privacy (RDP) accountant for privacy budget tracking
Mobile Implementation
The mobile application is built using:
Flutter/Dart for cross-platform mobile development
Pure Dart implementation of Matrix Factorization model
HTTP client for server communication
Resource monitoring APIs for battery, CPU, and memory tracking
Folder Organization
Root Directory Structure
master_thesis/ ├── server.py                          # FastAPI server for federated learning ├── client.py                          # Python federated learning client ├── run_experiment.py                  # Single experiment runner ├── run_all_experiments.py             # Master experiment orchestrator ├── centralized_baseline.py            # Centralized training baseline ├── dp_sweep_experiment.py             #  privacy budget sweep ├── heterogeneity_sweep_experiment.py  # Data heterogeneity sweep ├── comprehensive_analysis.py          # Results analysis and visualization ├── analyze_results.py                 # Result analysis utilities ├── analyze_combined_results.py        # Combined results analysis ├── quick_summary.py                   # Quick result summaries ├── show_summary.py                    # Display experiment summaries ├── init_server_model.py               # Server model initialization ├── start_server.py                    # Server startup helper ├── test_data_collection.py            # Data collection testing ├── requirements.txt                   # Python dependencies ├── ratings.csv                        # MovieLens dataset │ ├── scripts/                           # Utility scripts │   ├── __init__.py │   ├── rdp_accountant.py             # RDP privacy accountant │   ├── metrics_collector.py          # Metrics collection utilities │   ├── recommendation_metrics.py      # Recommendation evaluation metrics │   └── attack_evaluation.py          # Privacy attack evaluation │ ├── federated_learning_in_mobile/      # Mobile application │   ├── lib/                           # Dart source code │   │   ├── main.dart                  # Main app entry point │   │   ├── models/ │   │   │   └── matrix_factorization.dart  # Matrix factorization model │   │   ├── services/ │   │   │   ├── api_client.dart       # HTTP client for server │   │   │   └── fl_client.dart        # Federated learning client logic │   │   └── utils/ │   │       ├── metrics_collector.dart    # Metrics collection │   │       ├── model_encoder.dart       # Model parameter encoding │   │       └── resource_monitor.dart     # Resource monitoring │   ├── android/                       # Android-specific configuration │   ├── ios/                           # iOS-specific configuration │   ├── pubspec.yaml                   # Flutter dependencies │   └── README.md                      # Mobile app documentation │ ├── results/                           # Experiment results (JSON/CSV) ├── mobile_results/                   # Mobile device experiment results ├── figures/                           # Generated plots and visualizations │   ├── accuracy_vs_epsilon.png │   ├── accuracy_vs_alpha.png │   ├── convergence.png │   ├── recommendation_metrics.png │   └── summary_table.csv │ └── [Documentation files]             # Various .md guide files
Key Directories Explained
scripts/ - Core Utilities
*rdp_accountant.py**: Implements the Rényi  Privacy accountant for tracking privacy budget consumption. Provides methods to compute RDP parameters, convert to (ε, δ)-DP, and track cumulative privacy loss across federated rounds.
*metrics_collector.py**: Handles collection and serialization of experiment metrics, including training loss, recommendation metrics, and resource usage statistics.
*recommendation_metrics.py**: Implements evaluation metrics for recommendation systems, including Hit Rate@K, NDCG@K, Precision@K, Recall@K, and F1-score.
*attack_evaluation.py**: Provides utilities for evaluating privacy attacks (membership inference, attribute inference, gradient inversion).
federated_learning_in_mobile/ - Mobile Application
*lib/main.dart**: Main Flutter application entry point, containing the UI for connecting to the server, running training rounds, and displaying metrics.
*lib/models/matrix_factorization.dart**: Pure Dart implementation of the Matrix Factorization model, compatible with the Python PyTorch version.
*lib/services/fl_client.dart**: Core federated learning client logic, handling model download, local training, and parameter upload.
*lib/services/api_client.dart**: HTTP client wrapper for communicating with the FastAPI server.
*lib/utils/**: Utility modules for model encoding/decoding, metrics collection, and resource monitoring.
results/ - Experiment Outputs
Contains JSON and CSV files with experiment results, including:
Per-round metrics (loss, accuracy, recommendation metrics)
Final aggregated results
Client-level statistics
Privacy budget consumption
figures/ - Visualizations
Generated plots and tables from comprehensive_analysis.py, including:
Privacy-utility trade-off curves
Convergence plots
Heterogeneity impact analysis
Summary statistics tables
Running the Code
Prerequisites
Python Environment (Python 3.8+)
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```
Dataset: Ensure ratings.csv (MovieLens 100K) is in the project root
Flutter SDK (for mobile app, optional): Flutter 3.9.2+
   ```bash
   cd federated_learning_in_mobile
   flutter pub get
   ```
Quick Start: Running All Experiments
The simplest way to run all experiments is using the master orchestrator:
```bash
# Terminal 1: Start the federated learning server
python server.py
# Terminal 2: Run all experiments
python run_all_experiments.py
```
This will execute:
Centralized baseline (no server needed)
DP sweep experiments (ε ∈ {∞, 8, 4, 2, 1})
Heterogeneity sweep experiments (α ∈ {0.1, 0.5, 1.0})
Comprehensive analysis and visualization
Estimated Time: 4-8 hours (depending on hardware)
Running Individual Experiments
1. Centralized Baseline
Establishes the performance upper bound without federated learning:
```bash
python centralized_baseline.py
```
Output: results/centralized_baseline.json
2.  Privacy Sweep
Evaluates accuracy-privacy trade-offs across different privacy budgets:
```bash
# Ensure server is running first
python server.py  # In another terminal
# Run DP sweep
python dp_sweep_experiment.py
```
Configuration: Tests ε ∈ {∞, 8, 4, 2, 1} with 3 random seeds each
Output: results/dp_*_alpha_0.5_dim_16_clients_100_seed_*.json
3. Heterogeneity Sweep
Assesses impact of non-IID data distributions:
```bash
# Server should still be running
python heterogeneity_sweep_experiment.py
```
Configuration: Tests α ∈ {0.1, 0.5, 1.0} with 3 random seeds each
Output: results/dp_*_alpha_*_dim_16_clients_100_seed_*.json
4. Single Experiment
Run a single federated learning experiment:
```bash
# Terminal 1: Start server
python server.py
# Terminal 2: Run experiment
python run_experiment.py
```
5. Analysis and Visualization
Generate plots and summary tables:
```bash
python comprehensive_analysis.py
```
Output: 
figures/accuracy_vs_epsilon.png
figures/accuracy_vs_alpha.png
figures/convergence.png
figures/recommendation_metrics.png
figures/summary_table.csv
Running with Mobile Devices
Server Setup
Start the server:
   ```bash
   python server.py
   ```
Make server accessible:
Local Network: Use your PC's local IP (e.g., 192.168.1.100:8000)
External Access: Use ngrok or similar tunneling service
Mobile App Setup
Navigate to mobile app directory:
   ```bash
   cd federated_learning_in_mobile
   ```
Install dependencies:
   ```bash
   flutter pub get
   ```
Run on Android device/emulator:
   ```bash
   flutter run
   ```
In the app:
Enter server URL (e.g., http://192.168.1.100:8000)
Enter unique Client ID
Click "Connect to Server"
Run training rounds
Hybrid Experiments
You can run experiments with both Python clients and mobile devices simultaneously:
Multiple Python clients (for large-scale parameter sweeps)
2+ Android devices (for real mobile validation)
All connect to the same server
Server aggregates all updates together
Repository Information
Code Repository
The complete codebase is available at:
https://github.com/jonathanjohn47/master_thesis.git
Repository Structure
The repository follows a standard Python/Flutter project structure with:
Clear separation between server, client, and mobile components
Modular scripts for different experiment types
Comprehensive documentation in markdown files
Results and figures directories for outputs
Version Control
The codebase uses Git for version control. Key branches:
main: Stable production code
experiments: Experimental features and variations
mobile: Mobile-specific implementations
Key Components
Server server.py)
The FastAPI server orchestrates federated learning:
Key Features:
RESTful API endpoints for client registration, model download, and parameter upload
Weighted federated averaging (FedAvg) aggregation
Model parameter serialization in portable JSON format (base64-encoded Float32)
Support for multiple concurrent clients (Python and mobile)
Health check and status endpoints
Main Endpoints:
POST /register: Client registration
GET /global-params-json: Download global model parameters
POST /upload-params-json: Upload local model updates
GET /healthz: Health check
POST /mobile-results: Receive mobile device metrics
Model Architecture:
Matrix Factorization with embedding dimension 16
User and item embedding matrices
MSE loss for rating prediction
Client client.py)
Python federated learning client implementation:
Key Features:
Local model training on client-specific data partitions
DP-SGD support with gradient clipping and noise addition
Non-IID data partitioning via Dirichlet distribution
Automatic server connection and round participation
Metrics collection and logging
Configuration:
Embedding dimension: 16
Learning rate: 0.01
Batch size: 32
Local epochs: 1
Gradient clipping norm: 1.0
DP noise multiplier: calibrated via RDP accountant
RDP Accountant scripts/rdp_accountant.py)
Privacy budget tracking using Rényi  Privacy:
Key Features:
Computes RDP parameters for Gaussian mechanism
Converts RDP to (ε, δ)-DP guarantees
Tracks cumulative privacy loss across rounds
Supports privacy amplification via subsampling
Binary search for optimal noise multiplier calibration
Mathematical Foundation:
RDP order α ∈ [1.1, 64]
Gaussian mechanism: RDP_α = α / (2σ²)
Composition: additive over rounds
Conversion: ε = min_α [RDP_α + log(1/δ)/(α-1)]
Mobile Client federated_learning_in_mobile/lib/)
Flutter/Dart mobile application:
Key Features:
Pure Dart Matrix Factorization model (compatible with Python version)
HTTP-based communication with FastAPI server
Resource monitoring (battery, CPU, memory)
Real-time metrics display
Results export to CSV/JSON
Architecture:
main.dart: UI and app orchestration
fl_client.dart: Federated learning client logic
api_client.dart: Server communication
matrix_factorization.dart: Model implementation
resource_monitor.dart: Device resource tracking
Dependencies
Python Dependencies requirements.txt)
fastapi>=0.104.0          # Web framework for server
uvicorn>=0.24.0           # ASGI server
pydantic>=2.0.0           # Data validation
torch>=2.0.0              # Deep learning framework
numpy>=1.24.0             # Numerical computing
pandas>=2.0.0             # Data manipulation
requests>=2.31.0          # HTTP client
scikit-learn>=1.3.0       # Machine learning utilities
matplotlib>=3.7.0         # Plotting
seaborn>=0.12.0           # Statistical visualization

Flutter Dependencies federated_learning_in_mobile/pubspec.yaml)
```yaml
dependencies:
  flutter: sdk
  http: ^1.1.0                    # HTTP client
  device_info_plus: ^10.1.0        # Device information
  battery_plus: ^6.0.2            # Battery monitoring
  path_provider: ^2.1.1            # File system access
  csv: ^5.1.1                      # CSV export
  share_plus: ^7.2.1               # File sharing
  open_filex: ^4.3.3               # File opening
```
System Requirements
Server:
Python 3.8+
4+ GB RAM recommended
Network access for client connections
Mobile App:
Flutter SDK 3.9.2+
Android SDK (API level 21+)
iOS 12+ (for iOS builds)
Additional Documentation
The codebase includes extensive documentation in markdown files:
BEGINNER_GUIDE_TO_THESIS.md: Getting started guide
EXPERIMENT_GUIDE.md: Detailed experiment instructions
EXPERIMENT_RUNNER_GUIDE.md: Complete experiment runner documentation
DATA_COLLECTION_GUIDE.md: Data collection procedures
DATA_ANALYSIS_GUIDE.md: Result analysis guide
MOBILE_APP_SETUP_STEPS.md: Mobile app setup instructions
federated_learning_in_mobile/README.md: Mobile app documentation
Code Execution Flow
Federated Learning Round
Server Initialization: Server initializes global model with random weights
Client Registration: Clients register with server and receive client IDs
Model Download: Clients download current global model parameters
Local Training: Each client trains locally on their data partition
Forward pass: compute predictions
Backward pass: compute gradients
DP-SGD: clip gradients and add noise (if enabled)
Update: apply optimizer step
Parameter Upload: Clients upload updated parameters to server
Aggregation: Server performs weighted FedAvg aggregation
Broadcast: Server broadcasts updated global model
Repeat: Steps 3-7 for multiple rounds
Experiment Execution
Data Loading: Load and preprocess MovieLens dataset
Data Partitioning: Split data into train/test sets and client partitions
Model Initialization: Initialize server model
Federated Training: Execute multiple federated rounds
Evaluation: Evaluate model on test set after each round
Metrics Collection: Collect and log all metrics
Result Serialization: Save results to JSON/CSV files
Analysis: Generate plots and summary tables
Troubleshooting
Common Issues
Server Connection Failed:
Ensure server is running: python server.py
Check server URL (use IP address, not localhost for mobile)
Verify network connectivity
Import Errors:
Install dependencies: pip install -r requirements.txt
Check Python version (3.8+)
Model Dimension Mismatch:
Ensure embedding dimensions match between server and clients
Check model initialization parameters
Mobile App Build Errors:
Run flutter pub get to install dependencies
Check Flutter SDK version: flutter --version
Verify Android SDK is properly configured